1017 Records, also known as 1017 Brick Squad Records, is an American record label founded by Gucci Mane after his departure from Mizay Entertainment and the closing of So Icey Entertainment. The label has been a home to artists such as Waka Flocka Flame, Young Thug, Young Scooter, and Chief Keef among Young Dolph & others. Atlantic Records was hitherto been a distributor but the label parted ways with Atlantic in late 2013. 1017 Records is currently distributed By 101 Distribution. Gucci Mane opened the record label after signing with Mizay Entertainment in 2007, following the release of his independent album Trap-A-Thon. On May 4, 2010, Mane announced he had closed So Icey Entertainment and left Mizay Entertainment due to business problems with Debra Antney. Gucci Mane stated that he was starting his own record label and that his employer, Jerry Alvarado, was already signing a distribution deal with Asylum Records. The first artists to sign up to 1017 Brick Squad were OJ Da Juiceman and Waka Flocka Flame, who signed up whilst they were still signed to Mizay Entertainment. Juiceman debut album was unofficially released through the Brick Squad record label (officially it was released through Asylum Records and Mizay Entertainment). Brick Squad's first mainstream success occurred in 2009, when Gucci released The State vs. Radric Davis. Brick Squad also signed Waka Flocka Flame who released his debut album Flockaveli through Brick Squad, Mizay Entertainment and Warner Bros. On September 28, 2010, Mane released his third studio album, The Appeal: Georgia's Most Wanted. On December 16, 2011, member Slim Dunkin was shot and killed at an Atlanta recording studio preparing to shoot a music video. He was shot while arguing with another person in the building, who has been identified as another Atlanta rapper, Young Vito. On February 25, 2013, Atlanta rapper Young Vito, was acquitted of murdering Slim Dunkin. However, he was given 25 years for aggravated assault and possession of a firearm. On March 15, 2013, via Twitter Gucci Mane said that he "dropped" Waka Flocka Flame and he was no longer a member of 1017 Brick Squad. The next day Gucci's management claimed his Twitter account was hacked and he had not sent the tweet about Waka Flocka. However Waka would claim this to be false and later diss Gucci Mane at a Dipset reunion concert in New York City. On March 27, 2013 Waka would tell MTV that it would be impossible for him to be dropped from 1017 Brick Squad as he owns stake in the company. He would also confirm that there was indeed a feud going on between the rappers and "they would never make music or do business together again." On May 8, 2013, Gucci Mane announced via Twitter that Chicago rapper Chief Keef was the newest member of 1017 Brick Squad. The following day, Gucci announced that he also signed producer C4, who has frequently worked with 1017 artists in the past. On September 7, 2013, various members of 1017 Brick Squad and Brick Squad Mafia traded shots back and forth on Twitter, including Gucci Mane, Waka Flocka, Frenchie, Wooh Da Kid, and OJ da Juiceman. Gucci would go on to say "fuck brick squad" and accuse his former manager, Waka Flocka's mom Debra Antney of stealing money from OJ da Juiceman and French Montana. Frenchie also accused Gucci Mane of paying for Young Vito's lawyer, the accused murderer of former 1017 Brick Squad artist Slim Dunkin, which Gucci denied. Frenchie would release a diss record towards Gucci the following day. During the following days it was revealed OJ da Juiceman, Young Dolph, Frenchie and Wooh da Kid were no longer or in some cases had never been officially signed to 1017 Brick Squad Records. It was also revealed that the record label had lost their distribution deal with Atlantic Records. Gucci Mane(President/CEO/Founder) Tj Calmon $$$ Waka Flocka Flame Young Scooter Young Thug Chief Keef ASAP T CAL OG Boo Dirty PeeWee Longway Rulet 1017 Lex Luger Zaytoven Southside Shawty Redd Sonny Digital C4 Kayo Redd (deceased) Kebo Gotti Slim Dunkin (deceased) Brick Squad Monopoly, also known as "BSM", is a subsidiary label of 1017 Brick Squad Records. It was founded by Waka Flocka in 2011. On June 9, 2013 Waka Flocka announced that BSM would be releasing a compilation album. Waka Flocka Flame Wooh Da Kid Frenchie Neon Dreams 808 Mafia Dirt Gang (Dae Dae Deniro, D-Bo, Cam, J Mike, Dame Luchiano, Diego, Chaz Gotti, Kenny & Nuke) Fetti Gang Bo Deal CookedUp Money Mouse Cartel MGM Cartier Kitten Young Joey Haitian Fresh Huey Suga Ben G Sony Jeremy Greene Reema Major S. Money YG Hootie Joe Moses Ice Burgandy Chaz Gotti Joey Fatts Rayven Justice 