Paleontology, palaeontology or palontology (from Greek: paleo, "ancient"; ontos, "being"; and logos, "knowledge") is the study of prehistoric life forms on Earth through the examination of plant and animal fossils. This includes the study of body fossils, tracks (ichnites), burrows, cast-off parts, fossilised feces (coprolites), palynomorphs and chemical residues. Because mankind has encountered fossils for millennia, paleontology has a long history both before and after becoming formalized as a science. This article records significant discoveries and events related to paleontology that occurred or were published in the year 2015. A study of the anatomy of the skull of Acanthostega gunnari is published by Porro, Rayfield & Clack (2015). A study of the skeletal morphogenesis of the lepospondyls Microbrachis pelikani and Hyloplesion longicostatum is published by Olori (2015). A study of the anatomy of the skull of the lepospondyl Quasicaecilia texana is published by Pardo, Szostakiwskyj & Anderson (2015). = = = = A phylogenetic analysis of living and fossil squamate relationships, based on morphological and molecular data, is published by Reeder et al. (2015). Miocene anoles from the Dominican amber, showing the habitat specializations also present in the extant Caribbean anoles, are described by Sherratt et al. (2015). = = = = Revision of the type material of Rauisuchus tiradentes is published by Lautenschlager and Rauhut (2015). A study of the evolutionary history of the clade Crocodyliformes is published by Bronzati, Montefeltro and Langer (2015). A study on the phylogenetic position of thalattosuchians within Crocodylomorpha is published by Wilberg (2015). = = Brontosaurus is reestablished as a genus distinct from Apatosaurus. = = New cranial material of the Oligo-Miocene relative of flamingos, Harrisonavis croizeti, is described by Torres et al. (2015). New specimens of the Eocene relative of swifts, Scaniacypselus szarskii, are described by Mayr (2015). Zelenkov, Volkova and Gorobets (2015) describe buttonquail fossils from the late Miocene of Hungary, southern Ukraine and northern Kazakhstan, and transfer the species Calidris janossyi Kessler (2009) to the genus Ortyxelos. A specimen of a stem-coliiform Masillacolius brevidactylus with preserved skull is described by Mayr (2015). A study of the phylogenetic relationships of Psittacopes, Pumiliornis and Morsoravis, indicating their close relationship to the passerines and extinct family Zygodactylidae, is published by Mayr (2015); the author also introduced a new name, Parapasseres, for the clade containg Passeriformes and Zygodactylidae but not Psittacopes. A Dwarf Emu was found in the Miocene of Alcoota in Central Australia. Jones et al. (2015) describe a distal end of the left tibiotarsus of a member of the genus Caracara of uncertain specific assignment from the late Pleistocene of Argentina, estimated to be the largest member of the family Falconidae described thus far. = = A study on the terrestrial locomotion of non-pterodactyloid pterosaurs is published by Witton (2015). A specimen of Rhamphorhynchus muensteri with preserved soft tissues or impressions of soft tissues, stomach contents and possibly a coprolite is described by Hone et al. (2015). = = A study of the phylogenetic relationships of the Pleistocene camelid genus Camelops, based on genomic data extracted from its bones, is published by Heintzman et al. (2015). = Newly named non-eutherian mammals Metatherians Others Eutherians Xenarthrans Afrotherians Odd-toed ungulates Even-toed ungulates Cetaceans Carnivorans Rodents Primates Other eutherians 