The Air Force Institute of Technology (AFIT) is a graduate school and provider of professional and continuing education for the United States Armed Forces and is part of the United States Air Force. It is located in Ohio at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, near Dayton. Founded in 1919 and degree-granting since 1954, the Air Force Institute of Technology (AFIT) is an internationally renowned, MS and Ph.D. degree-granting academic institution of the United States Air Force, located within the Wright Patterson Air Force Base (WPAFB), Dayton, Ohio. Dayton area's rich heritage and industrial base in aeronautics and aviation, coupled with the close proximity to Air Force Research Laboratory (AFRL) and the National Air and Space Intelligence Center (NASIC) provide a unique, world-class scientific and engineering research and educational experience focused on producing future leaders of the Air Force and the Defense establishment. A component of Air University and Air Education and Training Command, its primary purpose is to provide continuing specialized education to select officer and enlisted U.S. military personnel and civilian employees at the graduate level. Previous names for AFIT include the Air School of Application and the Air Corps Engineering School. The United States Air Force Academy in Colorado Springs is the undergraduate counterpart of AFIT for the Air Force. On 8 May 2012, AFIT formally welcomed its first civilian director and chancellor during an appointment of leadership ceremony. Dr. Todd Stewart served for 34 years with the U.S. Air Force, retiring in 2002 at the rank of major general. AFIT's three resident schools include: The Graduate School of Engineering and Management offers graduate programs leading to Master of Science and Doctor of Philosophy degrees in engineering, applied science, and management disciplines. The Graduate School has six departments: Aeronautics and Astronautics Electrical and Computer Engineering Engineering Physics Mathematics and Statistics Operational Sciences Systems Engineering and Management The School of Systems and Logistics teaches more than 80 professional continuing education courses in acquisition management, logistics management, contracting, systems management, software engineering, and financial management delivered to warfighters around the globe via customer focused delivery modes including resident, on-site, and online courses. The Civil Engineer School develops and delivers civil engineer and environmental professional continuing education and provides consultation in support of U.S. air and space forces. AFIT has seven research centers funded by a number of federal agencies with interdisciplinary scope and international footprint representing a number of game changing scientific areas for the United States Air Force and the Department of Defense: Autonomy, Navigation & Technology (ANT) Center for Directed Energy (CDE) Center for Cyber Research (CCR) and Air Force Cyberspace Technical Center of Excellence Center for Operational Analysis (COA) Center for Space Research & Assurance (CSRA) Center for Technical Intelligence Studies & Research (CTISR) Scientific Test and Analysis Techniques (STAT) Center of Excellence (COE) AFITs Graduate School of Engineering and Management is a graduate-only, researchbased institution and the sole degree-granting element of AFIT. The Graduate School focuses on studies and research that are relevant to the Air Force mission as well as the needs of the defense establishment as a whole. AFIT's Aeronautics & Astronautics Department has graduated nine U. S. astronauts including Guy Bluford (Ph.D. 1978), first African-American astronaut. The Graduate School enrolls over 700 full-time graduate students. The student body consists primarily of Air Force officers, but is rounded out by members of the other four U.S. Armed Services, select enlisted Airmen, international students from coalition countries, U.S. Government civilians, and civilians (U.S. citizens) not affiliated with the Government. Selection of officers for graduate education is fully funded by their service and is based upon outstanding professional performance as an officer, promotion potential, and a strong academic background. Admission of non-Government affiliated civilians is based on academic preparation and requires U.S. citizenship. A substantial number of AFIT graduates are assigned to AFRL and NASIC upon graduation from AFIT. Many of the AFIT student thesis projects are influenced directly or indirectly by AFRL, NASIC, NRO and other Air Force and defense agencies. The faculty is drawn from prestigious academic institutions and are highly respected scholars in their disciplines and undergo a rigorous promotion and tenure process comparable to top universities in the United States. The faculty body consists of approximately a 5050 mix of military and civilian members all of whom hold a Ph.D. in their fields. The faculty to student ratio is typically 1 to 6 in the master's degree programs. AFIT is accredited by the Higher Learning Commission of the North Central Association of Colleges and Schools, 30 North LaSalle Street, Suite 2400, Chicago, Illinois 60602-2504 to offer degrees to the doctorate level. Eight engineering programs in the Graduate School of Engineering and Management are accredited at the advanced level by the Accreditation Board for Engineering and Technology (ABET). The quarters are 10 weeks in length plus a week for examinations. Typically, the Fall term begins in late September and ends in mid-December; the Winter term begins in early January and ends in mid-March; the Spring term begins in late March and ends in mid-June; and the Summer term begins in late June and ends in early-September. The educational expenses for full-time military students assigned to AFIT are paid by their respective uniformed service. For tuition-paying students, the approximate cost is $3,900 per quarter for full-time enrollment (based on 12 quarter hours and a tuition rate of $325 per quarter hour). The tuition for distance learning students is $360 per hour. AFIT's Civilian Institution Programs support Air Force educational requirements through graduate and professional continuing education and research at civilian universities, hospitals, research centers, and corporations. George W.S. Abbey Former Director Johnson Space Center Brigadier General Russell J. Anarde, USAF, Ret. Captain Milburn G. Apt The first pilot to achieve Mach 3 General George T. Babbitt, Jr., USAF, Ret. Brigadier General Rosanne Bailey, USAF, Ret. David Barish Developer of the Paraglider Lieutenant General Ted F. Bowlds Brigadier General Cary C. Chun Lieutenant General Roger G. DeKok, USAF, Ret. Lieutenant General William J. Donahue, USAF, Ret. General Jimmy Doolittle- Doolittle Raider Lieutenant General Hans H. Driessnack, USAF, Ret. Colonel Arnold L. Franklin Jr. USAF, Ret In April 1986, as the 493rd Tactical Fighter Squadron, Franklin led the USAF raid on Libya. Dr. Russell Merle Genet Pioneered the worlds first fully robotic observatory Lt Col George E. Hardy, USAF, Ret Tuskegee Airmen Brigadier General Harold R. Harris, USAF, Ret. General Robert T. Herres, USAF, Ret. General Charles R. Holland, USAF, Ret. Robert P. Johannes One of the developers of the control configured vehicle (CCV) concept Lt Col Frank A. Kappeler, USAF, Ret Doolittle Raider General George Kenney, USAF, Ret. Major General Donald L. Lamberson, USAF, Ret. Considered the father of lasers in the Air Force Major General Louis G. Leiser, USAF, Ret. Donald S. Lopez, USAF, Ret. Deputy Director of the Smithsonian's National Air and Space Museum Lieutenant John A. Macready American Test Pilot and Aviator Lieutenant General Forrest S. McCartney, USAF, Ret. Lt Col Harry C. McCool, USAF, Ret Doolittle Raider Lt John A. Macready, USAF, Ret American test pilot and aviator General Bernard Schriever, USAF, Ret. General Lawrence Skantze, USAF, Ret. Major General Joseph K. Spiers, USAF, Ret. Lieutenant General James W. Stansberry, USAF, Ret. Lieutenant General William E. Thurman, USAF, Ret. Major General Jerry White (Navigators), USAF, Ret. Colonel Richard V. Wheeler, USAF, Ret. American Test Pilot and Aviator Archie Williams - Gold medal winner of the 400 m sprint - 1936 Olympic Games in Berlin Michael Wynne Former Secretary of the Air Force General William L. Shelton, USAF Lieutenant General Andrew E. Busch, USAF Major General Timothy A. Byers, USAF Major General Bruce A. Casella, USA Major General Dwyer L. Dennis, USAF Major General Joseph P. DiSalvo, USA Major General Jim H. Keffer, USAF Major General Susan K. Mashiko, USAF Major General Wendy M. Masiello, USAF Brigadier General Daryl L. Hauck, USAF Brigadier General James E. "Woody" Haywood, USAF Brigadier General Scott W. Jansson, USAF Brigadier General Randy A. Kee, USAF Brigadier General Richard A. Klumpp Jr., USAF Brigadier General Kenneth J. Moran, USAF Kevin A. Ford Michael E. Fossum William Anders Guion Bluford Mark N. Brown Roger B. Chaffee Gordon Cooper Albert H. Crews Donn F. Eisele John M. Fabian Gus Grissom James D. Halsell Steven Lindsey Richard Mullane Donald H. Peterson Major General Robert A. Rushworth, USAF, Ret. Eileen A. Bjorkman Dr. L. Wayne Brasure Kevin W. Buckley Bruce A. Busler Charles G. "Chuck" Carpenter Mark A. Correll Dr. Daniel DeForest Dr. Mark A. Gallagher James F. Geurts Michael M. "Mike" Hale Robert Scott Jack II Dr. Brian A. Maher Dr. Charles L. Matson Richard W. McKinney David C. Merker Dr. Billy W. Mullins Dr. David F. O'Brien Gary A. O'Connell Charles N. "Pete" Peterson Dr. Steven K. Rogers Dr. David E. Walker Joseph D. "Dean" Yount Air School of Application 1919 1920 Air Service Engineering School 1920 1926 Air Corps Engineering School 1926 1941 Army Air Forces Engineering School 1944 1945 Army Air Forces Institute of Technology 1945 1947 Air Force Institute of Technology 1947 1948 United States Air Force Institute of Technology 1948 1955 Institute of Technology, USAF 1955 1956 Air Force Institute of Technology 1956 1959 Institute of Technology 1959 1962 Air Force Institute of Technology 1962 present 