Aladdin Jr. is a one-act, seven-scene theatre musical adapted from the animated Disney film Aladdin which is an adaptation of the folk tale Aladdin. The production runs between 60 and 80 minutes and includes five female parts, six male parts, and a chorus. Aladdin Jr. is a part of the Aladdin Jr. Broadway by Music Theatre International (MTI). MTI's Broadway Jr. series adapts full length musicals into approximately 70-minute productions that are more manageable for middle school aged performers. Aladdin Jr. rights come in a kit which includes scripts for the main cast and chorus books for the chorus. Also included is a choreography DVD and a performance/rehearsal CD. The performance tracks are first on the CD and include all the music without voices, whereas the rehearsal CD provides the music along with recorded voices. Also included is a director's book with the full script as well as area to make notes and suggestions for staging. The full score is included for music teachers or for a live orchestra. Both the story and music in this truncated version closely follow the original film. Songs from the Disney film include "Arabian Nights," "One Jump Ahead, "Friend Like Me," "Prince Ali," and "A Whole New World," as well as the song "Why Me" which is sung by Jafar and Iago. It was originally written for the Disney film, but it was not included in it. The songs are somewhat different in Aladdin Jr. For example, the "One Jump Ahead" reprise is sung by Jasmine, not Aladdin. There are additional changes in the musical. For instance, three princes come try for Jasmine's hand in marriage. The additional narrators reprise "Arabian Nights" several times throughout the musical in order to more quickly further the plot as well as have "red carpet interviews" with several characters at the beginning of the show. There are also similar musicals based on The Jungle Book, Cinderella, One Hundred and One Dalmatians, The Aristocats and Sleeping Beauty but they have the word "Kids" at the end of the title instead of "Jr.". MTI's "Kids" musicals are written for even younger performers and are shortened further to run approximately 30 minutes. The musicals based on Alice in Wonderland and Mulan are "Jr." versions, which like Aladdin Jr. are more detailed. Source: MTI Shows Inside the Royal Palace gates in the faraway city of Agrabah, Princess Jasmine prepares to choose a husband ("Arabian Nights"). Against Jasmine's wishes, her father the Sultan insists that she pick from among three visiting Princes by tomorrow. The Princes names are Prince Baba of Ganoush, Prince Dahdu Rahn Rhan, and The Prince Formally Known As "The Artist". The Princes' public introduction is interrupted by a fleeing bread thief. Wandering among the crowd, a poor street urchin, Aladdin, suddenly finds himself holding the stolen bread and pursued by royal guards. Amidst in the commotion, Jasmine adopts a disguise and seizes the opportunity to escape into the bustling marketplace, where she bumps into Aladdin ("One Jump Ahead"). As they flee the bustling crowd and pursuers, the two share their experience of feeling "trapped", and they become attracted to one another. Aladdin brings Princess Jasmine to his chamber where Razoul and his Guards capture Aladdin. Princess Jasmine removes her cape revealing her crown. Razoul and the Guards exited with Aladdin. (One Jump Ahead- Reprise) In Jafar's chambers ("Arabian Nights - Reprise 1") the villainous vizier and his sidekick parrot Iago secretly rewrite a law so that the Princess will have to marry the Sultan's highest-ranking official Jafar if she fails to choose a husband within the time allotted ("Why Me?"). With the dungeons all full of prisoners, Razoul and the Guards take Aladdin to one of Jafar's caves on the outskirts of Agrabah ("Arabian Nights - Reprise 2"). There Aladdin finds an old lamp and rubs it, releasing Genie ("Friend Like Me"), who helps his new master escape the cave on Magic Carpet. Genie then grants the first of Aladdin's three wishes by turning him into Prince Ali Ababwa, which Aladdin hopes will help him woo Jasmine. Prince Ali enters with fanfare and impresses the Sultan ("Prince Ali"), but Jasmine remains reluctant to follow anyone's orders. Informed by Razoul about Aladdin's escape from the cave, Jafar and Iago suspect that Prince Ali may be a fake; Iago suggests it may be Aladdin who is in possession of a genie. In another part of the palace, Prince Ali gains Jasmine's trust and invites her to ride the Magic Carpet ("A Whole New World"). Returning to the princess's chamber, they agree to marry in the morning and bid farewell. As Aladdin revels in his success, Razoul's and his Guards seize him. Aladdin uses his second wish to freeze the guards, then runs to hug Genie, accidentally leaving behind the lamp. The Genie confesses that he longs to be free himself. Iago finds the lamp and shows it to the elated Jafar ("Why Me? - Reprise)"). Jafar and Iago interrupted the ceremony, forcing Prince Ali to confesses his true identity. Jafar seizes the opportunity to reveal the law that he forged and claim Jasmine as his bride and himself as sultan ("Prince Ali - Reprise"). With Jafar in possession of the lamp, Aladdin tricks him into wishing to become the most powerful genie of all time, which cleverly results in Jafar being trapped in the lamp. Aladdin then uses his last wish to free Genie and promises to give all his love to Princess Jasmine, if she will have him. The initially reluctant Sultan now grants his consent, and everyone lives happily, and freely, ever after ("A Whole New World - Finale"). Source: Aladdin Princess Jasmine Genie Narrators 1-5 Jafar Iago Sultan Razoul Magic Carpet Guards Attendants Prince Baba of Ganoush Prince Dahdu Rahn-Rahn (The) Prince Formerly Known as the Artist Townspeople Abu and Raja are optional characters "Arabian Nights" (part 1) Narrators, Aladdin, Jasmine, Genie, and the Company "Arabian Nights" (part 2) Company "Arabian Nights" (part 3) Jafar and the Ensemble "Arabian Nights" (part 7) Aladdin, Jasmine, Genie, and the Ensemble "One Jump Ahead" (part 1) Aladdin and the Ensemble "One Jump Ahead" (part 2) Aladdin and the Ensemble "One Jump Ahead" (reprise) Jasmine "Arabian Nights" (reprise 1) Narrators "Why Me?" Jafar and Iago "Arabian Nights" (reprise 2) Narrators and Aladdin "Friend Like Me" Genie and the Ensemble "Prince Ali" Genie and the Ensemble "A Whole New World" Aladdin and Jasmine "Why Me?" (reprise) Jafar and Guards "Prince Ali" (reprise 1) Jafar and the Ensemble "Prince Ali" (reprise 2) Jafar, Iago, Razoul and the Ensemble "A Whole New World" (finale) Aladdin, Jasmine, and the Company "Friend Like Me Bonus" (bows) - Genie and the Company 