Alagille syndrome is a genetic disorder that affects the liver, heart, kidney, and other systems of the body. Problems associated with the disorder generally become evident in infancy or early childhood. The disorder is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, and the estimated prevalence of Alagille syndrome is 1 in every 100,000 live births. It is named for Daniel Alagille. The severity of the disorder can vary within the same family, with symptoms ranging from so mild as to go unnoticed to severe heart and/or liver disease requiring transplantation. Signs and symptoms arising from liver damage in Alagille syndrome may include a yellowish tinge in the skin and the whites of the eyes (jaundice), itching (pruritus), and deposits of cholesterol in the skin (xanthomas). A liver biopsy may indicate too few bile ducts (bile duct paucity) or, in some cases, the complete absence of bile ducts (biliary atresia). Other signs of Alagille syndrome include congenital heart problems, an unusual butterfly shape of one or more of the bones of the spinal column that can be seen in an x-ray, certain eye defects such as posterior embryotoxon, and narrowed pulmonary arteries that can contribute to increased pressure on the right heart valves. Tetralogy of Fallot is a heart defect common in Alagille's syndrome patients. This defect consists of four separate heart abnormalities: Pulmonary stenosis; overriding aorta; ventricular septal defect; and right ventricular hypertrophy. Untreated Tetralogy of Fallot mortality rates range from 70 percent by age 10 to 95 percent by age 40. However, complete surgical repair can significantly improve both longevity and quality of life in Alagille's patients. Many people with Alagille syndrome have similar facial features, including a broad, prominent forehead, deep-set eyes, and a small pointed chin. The kidneys and central nervous system may also be affected. ALGS is caused by mutations in either JAG1 or NOTCH2. This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene is sufficient to cause the disorder. In some cases, an affected person inherits the mutation from one affected parent. Other cases may result from new mutations in the gene. These cases occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family. There is no known cure for Alagille's Syndrome. Most of the treatments available are aimed at improving the functioning of the heart and reducing the effects of impaired liver, kidney, and spleen function. Several medications are used to improve bile flow (pruritus): ursodiol (Actigall).These medications differ in their rates of success. Certain drugs may be used to reduce itching: hydroxyzine (Atarax), cholestyramine, rifampicin, phenobarbital, and Naltrexone. Similar to the medications which improve bile flow, the anti-itching drugs vary in their success rate. Many patients with Alagille's Syndrome will also benefit from a high dose of a multivitamin such as ADEK (continuing high levels of vitamins A, D, E, and K), as the reduced bile flow makes it difficult to absorb and utilize these vitamins. Corrective surgery is sometimes needed to repair heart defects associated with Alagille Syndrome. Also, because the pulmonary arteries are often narrow in patients with Alagille syndrome, a catheterization process similar to angioplasty may be used to widen the arteries to reduce pressure on the right side of the heart. In moderate to severe cases, stents may be placed in the arteries to increase their diameter. Transplantation of the liver has been a successful alternative to medication in severe cases. Partial biliary diversion has been used to significantly reduce pruritus, jaundice, and xanthomas caused by poor bile flow in patients with bile duct paucity. A portion of the bile produced by the liver is directed through a surgically created stoma into a plastic pouch on the patient's lower right abdomen. The pouch is periodically drained as it fills with bile. Patients with biliary atresia may require a Kasai procedure to improve bile drainage; however, later liver transplantation is still often necessary. 