Andrew Cohen (born 1955) is an award-winning Canadian journalist, bestselling author, and professor of journalism at Carleton University's School of Journalism and Norman Paterson School of International Affairs. Cohen has written widely on international affairs and on Canadian politics. His books include: A Deal Undone: The Making and Breaking of the Meech Lake and Trudeaus Shadow: The Life and Legacy of Pierre Elliott Trudeau. Cohen was born in Montreal, Quebec. He studied political science at McGill University and then took graduate degrees in journalism and international relations at Carleton University. From 1991 to 1993, he was a Visiting Fellow at the University of Cambridge. He also spent a year at the German Institute for International and Security Affairs in Berlin. He has worked as a journalist for The Ottawa Citizen, United Press International, Time, The Financial Post, Saturday Night and The Globe and Mail. At the Globe and Mail, he was a member of the Editorial Board and a columnist and foreign correspondent in Washington. Cohen has won two Canadian National Newspaper Awards, three National Magazine Awards and the Queen's Golden Jubilee Medal. He has written and co-edited six books, among them The Unfinished Canadian: The People We Are, and While Canada Slept: How We Lost Our Place in the World, which was a national bestseller and a finalist for the Governor General's Literary Award for Non-Fiction. His other publications include Extraordinary Canadians: Lester B. Pearson, and Lost Beneath the Ice: The Story of HMS Investigator. Cohen currently lives in Ottawa, Canada with his wife, Mary and his two children. The Unfinished Canadian: The People We Are Lester B. Pearson (2008, ISBN 0670067385) Trudeau's Shadow: The Life and Legacy of Pierre Elliott Trudeau (1999, ISBN 0679310061) While Canada Slept: How We Lost Our Place in the World (2003, ISBN 0771022751} Extraordinary Canadians: Lester B. Pearson Lost Beneath the Ice: The Story of HMS Investigator Evolutionary Enlightenment: A New Path to Spiritual Awakening Two Days in June: John F. Kennedy and the 48 Hours that Made History (2014, ISBN 0771023871) 