In hyperbolic geometry, the angle of parallelism , is the angle at one vertex of a right hyperbolic triangle that has two asymptotic parallel sides. The angle depends on the segment length a between the right angle and the vertex of the angle of parallelism. Given a point off of a line, if we drop a perpendicular to the line from the point, then a is the distance along this perpendicular segment, and or is the least angle such that the line drawn through the point at that angle does not intersect the given line. Since two sides are asymptotic parallel, There are five equivalent expressions that relate and a: where sinh, cosh, tanh, sech and csch are hyperbolic functions and gd is the Gudermannian function. The angle of parallelism was developed in 1840 in the German publication "Geometrische Untersuchungen zur Theory der Parallellinien" by Nicolai Lobachevsky. This publication became widely known in English after the Texas professor G. B. Halsted produced a translation in 1891. (Geometrical Researches on the Theory of Parallels) The following passages define this pivotal concept in hyperbolic geometry: The angle HAD between the parallel HA and the perpendicular AD is called the parallel angle (angle of parallelism) which we will here designate by (p) for AD = p. The angle of parallelism between an point P and a line l can be constructed by: construct line b through point P perpendicular to line l construct line d through point P perpendicular to line b Point B is the intersection of line b and line l construct circle a with center P going trough B construct circle c with center B going trough P Point C is one of the intersections of line l and circle c construct line e through point C perpendicular to line d Points D and E are where line e intersects with circle a the lines PD and PE are the limiting parallels trough P to l The lines l, b, d and e are the sides of a Lambert quadrilateral with the non right angle at C. In the Poincar half-plane model of the hyperbolic plane (see hyperbolic motions) one can establish the relation of to a with Euclidean geometry. Let Q be the semicircle with diameter on the x-axis that passes through the points (1,0) and (0,y), where y > 1. Since Q is tangent to the unit semicircle centered at the origin, the two semicircles represent parallel hyperbolic lines. The y-axis crosses both semicircles, making a right angle with the unit semicircle and a variable angle with Q. The angle at the center of Q subtended by the radius to (0, y) is also because the two angles have sides that are perpendicular, left side to left side, and right side to right side. The semicircle Q has its center at (x, 0), x < 0, so its radius is 1 x. Thus, the radius squared of Q is hence The metric of the Poincar half-plane model of hyperbolic geometry parametrizes distance on the ray {(0, y) : y > 0 } with natural logarithm. Let log y = a, so y = ea. Then the relation between and a can be deduced from the triangle {(x, 0), (0, 0), (0, y)}, for example: 