The Asia Series is an international club-level baseball tournament in East Asia that was first held in 2005. It features the annual champions of Nippon Professional Baseball, Chinese Professional Baseball League, the Korean Baseball Organization, the Australian Baseball League, and (beginning with the 2013 Asia Series) the European Cup champion, as well as an additional team from the host city. The China Baseball League, which did not hold any games during 2013, has also historically participated in the tournament. The Asia Series began as a tournament among the annual champions of Nippon Professional Baseball's (NPB) Japan Series, the Korea Baseball Organization's (KBO) Korean Series, the Chinese Professional Baseball League's (CPBL) Taiwan Series, and the China Baseball League's (CBL) championship series. (Prior to 2008 a China Baseball League all-star team, the China Stars, participated in the series instead of the league champion.) The tournament was sponsored by Konami from 2005 to 2007 and was known as the Konami Cup during that period. The Asia Series was placed on hold due to financing issues following the withdrawal of Konami, reducing 2009's pan-Asian postseason to a single Club Championship game between the Japanese and Korean champions at Nagasaki, with the Yomiuri Giants defeating the Kia Tigers, 94. A potential 2010 revival was then cancelled due to a conflict with the 2010 Asian Games and replaced with another round of club championship games. The Korean champion SK Wyverns split a two-game series with CPBL champion Brother Elephants in Taiwan, before being defeated by the NPB's Chiba Lotte Marines at the Tokyo Dome, 30. The subject of re-introducing the event for 2011 was discussed in a November 2010 meeting between the heads of the NPB, KBO, CPBL, and Australian Baseball League (ABL). The CPBL offered to host the event in November 2011. The ABL champion Perth Heat participated, with the ABL (whose season runs from November through February) adding a bye week to allow for it. In 2013, Fortitudo Baseball Bologna of the Italian Baseball League competed as the first representative of Europe to participate in the tournament, qualifying as the 2013 European Cup champions. Due to the CBL's hiatus that year, the tournament remained at six teams. The 2014 edition was cancelled due to scheduling issues. Each of the teams participates in a round-robin series, playing each other team once. The two teams with the best win-loss percentage face each other in the final, with the team finishing higher considered the "home team", meaning that they have the advantage of batting last. In previous tournaments, if teams were tied a series of tiebreakers were used to decide which teams qualified for the final and in what order, firstly using the head-to-head win-loss records amongst tied teams, and if necessary the ranking based on the lowest team run average. All games have the designated hitter rule in effect, though not all participating teams would have it in their regular league. 1: Participated in 2006 under its old name La New Bears 2: Participated in 2005 under its old name Sinon Bulls 