Atoms For Peace is an alternative rock supergroup formed in 2009 comprising Radiohead singer Thom Yorke (vocals, guitar, and piano), Red Hot Chili Peppers bassist Flea, longtime Radiohead producer Nigel Godrich (keyboards, synthesisers, guitars), Joey Waronker of Beck and R.E.M. (drums) and Mauro Refosco (percussion) of Forro in the Dark. Yorke formed the band to perform songs from his debut solo album, The Eraser (2006). Their debut album, Amok, was released on February 25, 2013. In 2006, Radiohead singer Thom Yorke released his first solo album, The Eraser. In 2009, to perform the album live, Yorke recruited Red Hot Chili Peppers bassist Flea, longtime Radiohead producer Nigel Godrich (keyboards, synthesisers, guitars), Joey Waronker of Beck and R.E.M. (drums) and Mauro Refosco (percussion) of Forro in the Dark. Yorke wanted to recreate the electronic beats of The Eraser using live musicians. He said: "Its like opening a big Pandora's Box, and I dont know what direction its going to go in. Weve got these bonkers rhythms made by machines, and musicians who can keep up with them no problem and the two can bounce off each other. Its quite something." The band went unnamed for early performances, listed as "Thom Yorke" or "??????". In February 2010, the band announced an American tour and a name, Atoms for Peace. The band shares the name with a 1953 speech by American President Dwight D. Eisenhower and a song from The Eraser. After the tour ended in 2010, Atoms for Peace spent three days jamming and recording original material in a Los Angeles studio. Yorke and producer Godrich edited and arranged the recordings from the sessions over two years, combining it with Yorke's electronic music. Their debut album, Amok, was released on February 25, 2013, through XL Recordings. Thom Yorke lead vocals, guitars, piano, keyboards, percussion Flea bass guitar, melodica, keyboards Nigel Godrich keyboards, synthesizers, guitars, percussion, backing vocals Mauro Refosco percussion, additional drums, marimba Joey Waronker drums 