Aziz Sancar (born 8 September 1946) is a Turkish and American biochemist and molecular biologist specializing in DNA repair, cell cycle checkpoints, and the circadian clock. In 2015, he was awarded the Nobel Prize in Chemistry along with Tomas Lindahl and Paul L. Modrich for their mechanistic studies of DNA repair. He is the co-founder of the Aziz and Gwen Sancar Foundation, which is a non-profit organization to promote Turkish culture and to support Turkish students in the United States. Aziz Sancar was born into a lower-middle-class Arabic-speaking family in the Savur district of Mardin Province, southeastern Turkey on September 8, 1946. He was the seventh of eight children. His parents were illiterate; however, they put great emphasis on education. In an interview with Turkish news agency T24, Sancar stated that during his youth, he was a nationalist. He is the cousin of HDP Mardin deputy Mithat Sancar. Aziz Sancar is honorary member of the Turkish Academy of Sciences and the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. His longest-running study has involved photolyase and the mechanisms of photo-reactivation. In his inaugural article in the PNAS, Sancar captures the elusive photolyase radicals he has chased for nearly 20 years, thus providing direct observation of the photocycle for thymine dimer repair. Aziz Sancar was elected to the National Academy of Sciences in 2005 as the first Turkish-American member. He is the Sarah Graham Kenan Professor of Biochemistry, at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. He is married to Gwen Boles Sancar, who graduated the same year and who is also a Professor of Biochemistry and Biophysics at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. Together, they founded Carolina Turk Evi, a permanent Turkish Center in close proximity to the campus of UNC-CH, which provides graduate housing for four Turkish researchers at UNC-CH, short term guest services for Turkish visiting scholars, and a center for promoting Turkish-American interchange. Sancar received his primary education near his hometown of Savur. He then completed his M.D. degree in Istanbul University of Turkey and completed his Ph.D. degree on the photoreactivating enzyme of E. coli in 1977 at the University of Texas at Dallas in the laboratory of Dr. C. Stan Rupert, now Professor Emeritus. He was awarded the 2015 Nobel Prize in Chemistry along with Tomas Lindahl and Paul L. Modrich for their mechanistic studies of DNA repair. Sancar is the second Turkish Nobel laureate after Orhan Pamuk, who is also an alumnus of Istanbul University. In the immediate aftermath of winning the Nobel Prize, debates arose on social media over his ethnicity. When questioned as to whether he is "Arab or half Turkish" by the BBC, Aziz Sancar responded by saying he was disturbed by such remarks. He stated: "I do not speak Arabic nor Kurdish. I am Turkish. Thats it." He then referred to the English people as "gvur" (i.e. "infidels") who he blamed for stirring problems in the Middle East. 