The Azure Dragon is one of the Four Symbols of the Chinese constellations. It represents the east and the spring season. It should not be confused with the mythological yellow dragon that is associated with the Emperor of China. It is also referred to in media, feng shui, other cultures, and in various venues as the Green Dragon and the Avalon Dragon. It is known as Qing Long in Chinese, Seiry in Japanese, Cheongnyong in Korean, and Thanh Long in Vietnamese. It is sometimes called the Azure Dragon of the East (simplified Chinese: ; traditional Chinese: ; pinyin: Dng Fng Qng Lng, or sometimes simplified Chinese: ; traditional Chinese: ; pinyin: Dng Fng Cng Lng). As the other three Symbols, there are seven "mansions", or positions, of the moon within Azure Dragon. The names and determinative stars are: In the novel Shuo Tang Yanyi (Tales of the Tang dynasty), the White Tiger's star is reincarnated as General Luo Cheng ( / ), who serves Li Shimin. The Azure Dragon's Star is reincarnated as General Shan Xiongxin ( / ), who serves Wang Shichong. The two generals are sworn brothers of Qin Shubao ( / ), Cheng Zhijie ( / ) and Yuchi Jingde ( / ). After death, their souls are said to possess heroes of the Tang dynasty and Goguryeo, such as Xue Rengui ( / ) and Yeon Gaesomun (). As an example, the Azure Dragon is represented on the tomb of Wang Hui (stone coffin, east side), Hsi-k'ang (extension of Szechwan during Han), Lu-shan. A Chinese rubbing of this was collected by David Crockett Graham and is in the Field Museum of Natural History. The dragon featured on the Chinese national flag in 1862-1912. In Japan, the Azure Dragon is one of the four guardian spirits of cities and is said to protect the city of Kyoto on the east. The west is protected by the White Tiger, the north is protected by the Black Tortoise, the south is protected by the Vermilion Bird, and the center is protected by the Yellow Dragon. In Kyoto there are temples dedicated to each of these guardian spirits. The Azure Dragon is represented in the Kiyomizu Temple in eastern Kyoto. Before the entrance of the temple there is a statue of the dragon which is said to drink from the waterfall within the temple complex at nighttime. Therefore each year a ceremony is held to worship the dragon of the east. In 1983, the Kitora Tomb was found in the village of Asuka. All four guardians were painted on the walls (in the corresponding directions) and a system of the constellations was painted on the ceiling. This is one of the few ancient records of the four guardians. In Korea, the murals of the Goguryeo Tombs found at Uhyon-ni in South Pyongan province features the Azure Dragon and the other mythological creatures of the four symbols. 