Ballater (Scottish Gaelic: Bealadair) is a burgh in Aberdeenshire, Scotland on the River Dee, immediately east of the Cairngorm Mountains. Situated at an elevation of 213 m (700 ft), Ballater is a centre for hikers and known for its spring water, once said to cure scrofula. It is home to more than 1500 inhabitants. The medieval pattern of development along this reach of the River Dee was influenced by the ancient trackways across the Grampian Mounth, which determined strategic locations of castles and other Deeside settlements of the Middle Ages. In the early 14th century, the area was part of the estates of the Knights of St John, but the settlement did not develop until around 1770; first as a spa resort to accommodate visitors to the Pananich Mineral Well, then later upon the arrival of the railway in 1866 it was visited by many tourists taking advantage of the easier access thus afforded. Ballater railway station was closed in 1966 but remains in use as a visitor centre with an exhibition recording the village's royal connection. Many buildings date from the Victorian era and the centre of the village is a conservation area. The old railway station/ visitor centre was substantially damaged by fire in May 2015 and is now closed. Balmoral Castle, the British Royal Family's holiday home, lies approximately 12 km west, and the family has visited the town frequently since the time of Queen Victoria. Birkhall lies about 2 km south-west of Ballater. The Victoria Barracks is used by the Royal Guard for the castle. Local stores had for decades Royal Warrants bestowed upon them. Five years after the passing of Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother, who had granted them, the warrants lapsed and, to the chagrin of many townsfolk and especially shop owners, were removed. Several shops still display the arms marking the royal warrant. A Met Office weather station collects weather data at Balmoral, just over 7 miles to the west of Ballater. Like the rest of Scotland and the British Isles, Ballater experiences a maritime climate with cool summers and mild winters. Its upland position means temperatures throughout the year are cooler than lower-lying areas, and snowfall more plentiful during winter months. Ballater is a centre for tourism in Royal Deeside, with the Cairngorms and Balmoral Castle nearby. There are two bike hire shops in the village. The old Ballater station, containing Queen Victoria's waiting room, is now a visitor centre with a replica royal carriage. Balmoral Castle is a 10-minute drive from the village. There are many walks from the village. For the easy going walker, there is Craigendarroch, a small, peculiarly shaped hill near the village. About 12 km (7 miles) south-west of Ballater is Loch Muick. From there experienced walkers can head up the prominent mountain, Lochnagar. Ballater is the home of many challenging walks due to the abundance of Munros in the area. The River Dee flows through Ballater, and is famous for salmon fishing. Events in the town include: The Ballater Walking Festival each May attracts many hillwalkers of all levels. Participants are guided through the hills and valleys of the eastern Cairngorms. The Ballater Boules Challenge, on alternate Sundays from November to March each year, provides an alternative sport when the weather is not cold enough for the traditional game of curling. Victoria Week, held annually in August, is a celebration of Ballater's connection with Queen Victoria and Balmoral Castle. The village has its own 'tongue in cheek', on-line newspaper, the Ballater Bugle. Recently five Ballater residents refurbished the Automobile Association's Patrol Box at Cambus O'May, one of only an estimated 8 to 10 such historical call boxes remaining in situ in Great Britain. There is a bus garage located near to the village centre which provides an hourly public service to Aberdeen's Union Square bus station. Sir Patrick Geddes, biologist and botanist 