BernardSoulier syndrome (BSS), also called hemorrhagiparous thrombocytic dystrophy, is a rare autosomal recessive coagulopathy (bleeding disorder) that causes a deficiency of glycoprotein Ib (GpIb), the receptor for von Willebrand factor, an important glycoprotein involved in hemostasis. The incidence of BSS is estimated to be less than 1 case per million persons, based on cases reported from Europe, North America, and Japan. BSS is a giant platelet disorder, meaning that it is characterized by abnormally large platelets. As with other congenital platelet function defects, BSS often presents as a bleeding disorder with symptoms of: Perioperative and postoperative bleeding Bleeding gums Easy bruising Heavy menstrual periods Epistaxis (nosebleeds) Abnormally prolonged bleeding from small injuries Characterized by prolonged bleeding time, thrombocytopenia (likely due to decreased platelet survival), increased megakaryocytes (bone marrow platelet progenitors), and enlarged platelets, BernardSoulier syndrome is associated with quantitative or qualitative defects of the platelet glycoprotein complex GPIb/V/IX. The degree of thrombocytopenia may be estimated incorrectly, due to the possibility that when the platelet count is performed with automatic counters, giant platelets (which may be as frequent as 7080% in occasional patients) may reach the size of red blood cells and, as a consequence, are not recognized as platelets by the counters. The large platelets and low platelet count in BSS are seemingly due to the absence of GPIb and the filamin A binding site that links the GPIb-IX-V complex to the platelet membrane skeleton, as the enlarged platelet abnormality and low platelet count have been reversed in BSS mice by expression of an -subunit of GPIb in which most of the extracytoplasmic sequence has been replaced by an isolated domain of the -subunit of the human IL-4 receptor but in which the cytoplasmic sequence is normal. BSS platelets do not aggregate to ristocetin, and this defect is not corrected by the addition of normal plasma, distinguishing it from von Willebrand disease. The platelet responses to physiologic agonists is normal, with the exception of low concentrations of thrombin. Bleeding events, which may be very severe, can be controlled by platelet transfusion. Most heterozygotes, with few exceptions, do not have a bleeding diathesis. BSS presents as a bleeding disorder due to the inability of platelets to bind and aggregate at sites of vascular endothelial injury. There are three forms: Type A - GP1BA Type B - GP1BB Type C - GP9 The syndrome is named after Dr. Jean Bernard and Dr. Jean Pierre Soulier. 