Beverly High School is a four-year public high school in Beverly, Massachusetts. It has an enrollment of approximately 1,300 students and is accredited by the Massachusetts Department of Education and by the New England Association of Schools and Colleges. The staff consists of a Principal, three assistant principals, an Athletic Director, six Guidance Counselors and about a hundred teachers including six department heads. The school mascot is the Beverly High Panthers. BHS offers four foreign languages including French, Spanish, Russian, and German. The school also offers 12 advanced placement courses. Over 90% of graduating seniors enroll in two or four year colleges. Beverly High School is a member of M.I.A.A with athletes participating in the Northeastern Conference. Athletics are open to all students at Beverly High School during Fall, Winter and Spring seasons. Fall Sports Boys Cross Country Girls Cross Country Football Girls Volleyball Field Hockey Boys Soccer Girls Soccer Golf Football Cheerleading Winter Sports Boys Basketball Girls Basketball Boys Indoor Track Girls Indoor Track Swimming Gymnastics Boys Hockey Girls Hockey Wrestling Basketball Cheerleading Spring Sports Baseball Softball Boys Lacrosse Girls Lacrosse Boys Spring Track Girls Spring Track Boys Tennis Girls Tennis Sailing = Beverly High School has played rival Salem High School on Thanksgiving since 1891, making it one of the longest high school football rivalries in the country. The 100th game in 1998 attracted over 11,000 fans to Hurd Stadium. The overall record has BHS winning 54517. In 2010, the team won the Division III State Championship by defeating heavily favored and undefeated Somerset by a score of 28-20. Beverly overcame a 20-7 halftime deficit, and rallied back to complete one of the biggest upsets in Massachusetts High School Playoff Football history. In 2012, the Beverly Panthers varsity football team won the division 3 Superbowl against Natick at Gillette Stadium, winning 28-21. This win gave them a perfect season of 13-0, the first in the high school's history. North Shore Science League (3rd place overall for 2011'-2012' & 2012'-2013') Math Team Key Club Gay Straight Alliance Eco-Club Best Buddies Aegis Anime Club Habitat for Humanity Paranormal Club Model United Nations Ski Club Gaming League In 2011 main construction of the new Beverly High School, still located at 100 Sohier Road, completed. The old building has since been demolished and landscaping and site work is currently underway including the construction of two new turf fields. Installed in 1981, Beverly High School became the first school in the country to have solar panels. These 100 kW ground mounted panels were supplanted by 83 kW of roof mounted solar panels in 2011. Matthew Hubbard - television writer, most notable for his work on 30 Rock Alfred Marshall, founder of Marshalls Angela Miller - American Idol season 12 contestant Sean Yeaton - bassist of Parquet Courts 