A biodiversity hotspot is a biogeographic region with a significant reservoir of biodiversity that is under threat from humans. Norman Myers wrote about the concept in two articles in The Environmentalist (1988), & 1990 revised after thorough analysis by Myers and others in Hotspots: Earths Biologically Richest and Most Endangered Terrestrial Ecoregions. To qualify as a biodiversity hotspot on Myers 2000 edition of the hotspot-map, a region must meet two strict criteria: it must contain at least 0.5% or 1,500 species of vascular plants as endemics, and it has to have lost at least 70% of its primary vegetation. Around the world, 34 areas qualify under this definition, with nine other possible candidates. These sites support nearly 60% of the world's plant, bird, mammal, reptile, and amphibian species, with a very high share of endemic species. Only a small percentage of the total land area within biodiversity hotspots is now protected. Several international organizations are working in many ways to conserve biodiversity hotspots. Critical Ecosystem Partnership Fund (CEPF) is a global program that provides funding and technical assistance to nongovernmental organizations and participation to protect the Earth's richest regions of plant and animal diversity including: biodiversity hotspots, high-biodiversity wilderness areas and important marine regions. CI works in more than 40 countries on four continents, with headquarters near Washington, D.C. The World Wide Fund for Nature has derived a system called the "Global 200 Ecoregions", the aim of which is to select priority Ecoregions for conservation within each of 14 terrestrial, 3 freshwater, and 4 marine habitat types. They are chosen for their species richness, endemism, taxonomic uniqueness, unusual ecological or evolutionary phenomena, and global rarity. All biodiversity hotspots contain at least one Global 200 Ecoregion. Birdlife International has identified 218 Endemic Bird Areas (EBAs) each of which hold two or more bird species found nowhere else. Birdlife International has identified more than 11,000 Important Bird Areas all over the world. Plantlife International coordinates several the world aiming to identify Important Plant Areas. Alliance for Zero Extinction is an initiative of a large number of scientific organizations and conservation groups who co-operate to focus on the most threatened endemic species of the world. They have identified 595 sites, including a large number of Birdlife s Important Bird Areas. The National Geographic Society has prepared a world map of the hotspots and ArcView shapefile and metadata for the Biodiversity Hotspots including details of the individual endangered fauna in each hotspot, which is available from Conservation International. North and Central America California Floristic Province 8 Madrean pine-oak woodlands 26 Mesoamerica 2 The Caribbean Caribbean Islands 3 South America Atlantic Forest 4 Cerrado 6 Chilean Winter Rainfall-Valdivian Forests 7 Tumbes-Choc-Magdalena 5 Tropical Andes 1 Europe Mediterranean Basin 14 Africa Cape Floristic Region 12 Coastal Forests of Eastern Africa 10 Eastern Afromontane 28 Guinean Forests of West Africa 11 Horn of Africa 29 Madagascar and the Indian Ocean Islands 9 Maputaland-Pondoland-Albany 27 Succulent Karoo 13 Central Asia Mountains of Central Asia 31 South Asia Eastern Himalaya, Nepal 32 Indo-Burma, India and Myanmar 19 Western Ghats, India21 Sri Lanka, Sri Lanka21 South East Asia and Asia-Pacific East Melanesian Islands 34 New Caledonia 23 New Zealand 24 Philippines 18 Polynesia-Micronesia 25 Southwest Australia 22 Sundaland 16 Wallacea 17 East Asia Japan 33 Mountains of Southwest China 20 West Asia Caucasus 15 Irano-Anatolian 30 The high profile of the biodiversity hotspots approach has resulted in considerable criticism. Papers such as Kareiva & Marvier (2003) have argued that the biodiversity hotspots: Do not adequately represent other forms of species richness (e.g. total species richness or threatened species richness). Do not adequately represent taxa other than vascular plants (e.g. vertebrates, or fungi). Do not protect smaller scale richness hotspots. Do not make allowances for changing land use patterns. Hotspots represent regions that have experienced considerable habitat loss, but this does not mean they are experiencing ongoing habitat loss. On the other hand, regions that are relatively intact (e.g. the Amazon Basin) have experienced relatively little land loss, but are currently losing habitat at tremendous rates. Do not protect ecosystem services Do not consider phylogenetic diversity. A recent series of papers has pointed out that biodiversity hotspots (and many other priority region sets) do not address the concept of cost. The purpose of biodiversity hotspots is not simply to identify regions that are of high biodiversity value, but to prioritize conservation spending. The regions identified include some in the developed world (e.g. the California Floristic Province), alongside others in the developing world (e.g. Madagascar). The cost of land is likely to vary between these regions by an order of magnitude or more, but the biodiversity hotspot designations do not consider the conservation importance of this difference. 