Boston Arts Academy (BAA) in Boston, Massachusetts, USA is Boston's first and only high school for the visual and performing arts and is a partnership between Boston Public Schools and the ProArts Consortium. ProArts, a group of six arts colleges and universities in the Boston area, pushed the city to open the school, which was founded in 1998. The Consortium continues to support the school with performance space, music lessons and free college-level classes to BAA students. BAA won the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts, the National Schools of Distinction in Arts Education Award for the 2009-2010 school year from the Kennedy Center Alliance for Arts Education Network. BAA is Boston's only public school dedicated to the arts. The school day has no sports, yet is eight hours, two hours longer than normal schools, to allow for classes in the arts disciplines. The school offers a arts and academic education for students and inspire them to pursue higher education. BAA was also Boston's first full-inclusion high school; students with disabilities are fully integrated into the school program. Alumni achievements demonstrate the school's value as a step to success. Although admission is academic-blind, eighth graders must audition to be accepted to the performing arts program. Boston Arts Academy is competitive. In 2007, only 27% of the dance applicants would be accepted, just 6% would be accepted to the drumming program; and just 25 of the 81 theater applicants. BAA had 800 applicants for just 150 students in 2011. BAA offers an education to urban youth who come from less-than ideal backgrounds. Because of BAA's success with urban students, the school is involved in public education reform. Its use of the arts as a strategy for improving teaching and learning has attracted national and international attention. Through the schools Center for Arts in Education, BAAs best practices are documented and shared with educators, administrators and policymakers worldwide. In 2010, the school ran a pilot program for 125 ninth graders in summer school, who spent Fridays at BAA in remedial courses with recent BAA graduates as teachers. The students had very poor attendance records and other school and social problems, such as direct experience with violence. Most were in danger of not being promoted. The program was set up to rekindle an interest in school through non-traditional learning using theater, music, martial arts, poetry and other art forms. BAA is a member of the ProArts Consortium. Other members include Berklee College of Music, the Boston Architectural Center, The Boston Conservatory, Emerson College, Massachusetts College of Art, and the School of the Museum of Fine Arts. ProArts coordinates programs among its members to expand educational opportunities and resources for participating institutions and works to enrich the arts and arts education in Boston and throughout the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. Russell Ferguson, winner of season 6, So You Think You Can Dance Diane Guerrero, actress (rose to prominence with role in Orange Is the New Black) Kirven Boyd, dancer with Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater Belen Estrada, dancer with Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater David Davidson, guitarist with the band Revocation Brittany Butler, contestant on The Voice 