Braintree High School (BHS) is a four-year secondary school located in Braintree, Massachusetts, within Norfolk County. The school is part of the Braintree Public Schools district and is located to the northwest side of Sunset Lake at 128 Town Street. As of 2015, the Headmaster is James Lee. Braintree's school colors are blue and white and their school and athletic teams claim the nickname of "The Wamps." It is held by the school that the name is derived from the Massachusetts Indian Nation Chief Sachem known as Wampatuck, whose name means "White Deer." The building is considered Brutalist architecture. The old site of Braintree High School located at the intersection of West Street and Washington Street, opened in 1927. The current site of Braintree High School, located adjacent to Sunset Lake, opened in 1972. Braintree High School offers eighteen Advanced Placement (AP) courses; more than an eighth of the senior class is enrolled in at least one AP course. Braintree High is a member of the Bay State Conference, a league in District C of the Massachusetts Interscholastic Athletic Association. They have traditional rivalries with Milton High School, including the annual football game on Thanksgiving Day, and Weymouth High School. Recently the Boys' Gymnastics squad has consistently repeated as champions of the BSC while the Cheerleading squad competes on the national stage. There have been several other state champions produced by BHS in the past several years, most notably in girls' athletics. The Lady Wamps Basketball team won the state title for the 200506 fall season, while the Soccer team won in both 2005 and again in 2006. The boys ice hockey team made its first appearance in the Super Eight Ice Hockey Tournament in 2014, but lost to Catholic Memorial School in the play-in game, 2-1. In back-to-back years the Girls Basketball team won state championships in 2014 and went undefeated in 2015. The Varsity baseball team won the Super Eight Baseball Tournament in 2015, after previously losing to Newton North High School in 2014s final. The Wamps beat St. John's Preparatory School 7-3 after dropping the first game 20-4. The name of the field that Braintree Baseball plays at is Veterans Stadium. The football team and occasionally the soccer and lacrosse teams play at an artificial turf field named Alumni Stadium. The Braintree High gymnasium is named H. Fred Hegret Gymnasium. The golf team plays its home events at Braintree Municipal Golf Course. The gymnastics room is named Shuhwerk Gymnastics Room. The Braintree Athletic Complex is a planned athletic complex that will be located at Braintree High School. Kevin Buckley, former MLB player (Texas Rangers) Jim Calhoun, former coach of Connecticut Huskies men's basketball Chris Doherty, lead singer of the band Gang Green Peter Kormann, Olympic gymnast/Bronze medalist Boo Morcom, Olympic pole vaulter, masters world record holder Butch Stearns WFXT-TV (Fox-25) Sports Anchor Sun-Thursday Joseph Sullivan, mayor of the Town of Braintree Bob Dee, former NFL player, Boston Patriots 