Cancer () is the fourth astrological sign, which is associated with the constellation Cancer. It spans the 90-120th degree of the zodiac, between 90 and 125.25 degree of celestial longitude. Under the tropical zodiac, the Sun transits this area on average between June 21 and July 22, and under the sidereal zodiac, the Sun transits this area between approximately July 9 and August 15. The symbol of the crab is based on the Karkinos, a giant crab that harassed Hercules during his fight with the Hydra. Along with Scorpio and Pisces, Cancer forms the Watery Trigon. The Watery Trigon is one of four elemental trigons, fiery, earthy, airy, and watery. When a trigon is influential, it affects changes on earth. Cancer is said to be the house of Neptune and the exaltation of Jupiter, both astronomical bodies having influence over those born under Cancer. The sign of Cancer is said to be associated with the characteristics: watery, phlegmatic, eloquent, cardinal, northern, commanding, nocturnal, tenacious, intuitive, and fruitful. Those who are born from June 21 to July 22 are born under Cancer. Cancer is a northern sign and its opposite Southern sign is Capricorn. Places that Cancer is associated with are the sea, rivers, brooks, wells, wash-houses, marsh grounds, and trenches. The areas of the body that Cancer governs are the breast and the stomach. Cancerians are said to be people of sensation and feeling. They tend to go by their own intuition as opposed to reasonable advice. The story of Cancer the Crab is said to be connected to Hercules. Some storytellers say that during Hercules' fight with Lernaean Hydra, Hera, sent a crab to snap at Hercules' toes because Hera had sworn to kill Hercules. Hercules was able to kill the crab by smashing its shell with his foot. As a reward for its efforts serving her, Hera placed the crab in the sky and it became Cancer. In Chinese star lore, Cancer is in the 23rd of the 28 mansions or xiu. This mansion is called Gui which roughly translates to "ghosts". The Chinese divided the sky into four quarters, each with its own direction, season, and mythical creature. Cancer exists in the Red (Vermillion) Bird of the south. It is associated with summer. 