Caracas (Spanish pronunciation: [kaakas]), officially Santiago de Len de Caracas, is the capital, the center of the Greater Caracas Area, and the largest city of Venezuela. Caracas is located along the Guaire River in the northern part of the country, following the contours of the narrow Caracas Valley on the Venezuelan coastal mountain range (Cordillera de la Costa). Terrain suitable for building lies between 760 and 910 m (2,490 and 2,990 ft) above sea level. The valley is close to the Caribbean Sea, separated from the coast by a steep 2,200 m (7,200 ft) high mountain range, Cerro El vila; to the south there are more hills and mountains. The Metropolitan District of Caracas is made up of five municipalities: Libertador Municipality which is the only administrative division of the Venezuelan Capital District, and four other municipalities, which are within in Miranda State: Chacao, Baruta, Sucre, and El Hatillo. Libertador holds many of the government buildings and is the Capital District (Distrito Capital). The Distrito Capital had a population of 2,013,366 as of 2011, while the Metropolitan District of Caracas was estimated at 3,273,863 as of (2013). The Metropolitan Region of Caracas have an estimated population of 5,243,301. Businesses that are located here include service companies, banks, and malls, among others. It has a largely service-based economy, apart from some industrial activity in its metropolitan area. The Caracas Stock Exchange and Petrleos de Venezuela (PDVSA) are headquartered here. PDVSA is the largest company in Venezuela. Caracas is also Venezuela's cultural capital, with many restaurants, theaters, museums, and shopping centers. Some of the tallest skyscrapers in Latin America are located in Caracas. At the time of the founding of the city, more than four hundred years ago, the valley of Caracas was populated by indigenous peoples. Francisco Fajardo, the son of a Spanish captain and a Guaiqueri cacica, attempted to establish a plantation in the valley in 1562 after founding a series of coastal towns. Fajardo's settlement did not last long. It was destroyed by natives of the region led by Terepaima and Guaicaipuro. This was the last rebellion on the part of the natives. On 25 July 1567, Captain Diego de Losada laid the foundations of the city of Santiago de Len de Caracas. The foundation 1567 "I take possession of this land in the name of God and the King" These were the words of Don Diego de Losada in founding the city of Caracas on 25 July 1567. In 1577 Caracas became the capital of the Spanish Empire's Venezuela Province under Governor Juan de Pimentel (15761583). During the 17th century, the coast of Venezuela was frequently raided by pirates. With the coastal mountains as a barrier, Caracas was relatively immune to such attacks. However, in 1595, around 200 English privateers including George Sommers and Amyas Preston crossed the mountains through a little-used pass while the town's defenders were guarding the more often-used one. Encountering little resistance, the invaders sacked and set fire to the town after a failed ransom negotiation. As the cocoa cultivation and exports under the Compaa Guipuzcoana de Caracas grew in importance, the city expanded. In 1777, Caracas became the capital of the Captaincy General of Venezuela. Jos Mara Espaa and Manuel Gual led an attempted revolution aimed at independence, but the rebellion was put down on 13 July 1797. Caracas was ultimately the site of the signing of a Declaration of Independence on 5 July 1811. In 1812, an earthquake destroyed Caracas. The revolutionary war continued until 24 June 1821, when Bolvar defeated royalists in the Battle of Carabobo. Caracas grew in economic importance during Venezuela's oil boom in the early 20th century. During the 1950s, Caracas began an intensive modernization program which continued throughout the 1960s and early 1970s. The Universidad Central de Venezuela, designed by modernist architect Carlos Ral Villanueva and declared World Heritage by UNESCO, was built. New working- and middle-class residential districts sprouted in the valley, extending the urban area toward the east and southeast. Joining El Silencio, also designed by Villanueva, were several workers' housing districts, 23 de Enero and Simon Rodriguez. Middle-class developments include Bello Monte, Los Palos Grandes, Chuao, and El Cafetal. The dramatic change in the economic structure of the country, which went from being primarily agricultural to dependent on oil production, stimulated the fast development of Caracas, and made it a magnet for people in rural communities who migrated to the capital city in an unplanned fashion searching for greater economic opportunity. This migration created the rancho (slum) belt of the valley of Caracas. The flag of Caracas consists of a burgundy red field with the version of the Coat of Arms of the City (effective since the 1980s). The red field symbolises the blood spilt by Caraquenian people in favour of independence and the highest ideals of the Venezuelan Nation. Later, in the year 1994, presumably as a result of the change of municipal authorities, it was decided to increase the size of the Caracas coat of arms and move it to the centre of the field. This version of the flag is still in use today. The coat of arms of the City of Caracas was adopted by the Libertador Municipality to identify itself. Later, the Metropolitan Mayor Office assumed the lion, the scallop and Saint James' Cross for the same purpose. The anthem of the city is the Marcha a Caracas, written by the composer Tiero Pezzuti de Matteis with the lyrics by Jos Enrique Sarabia. The lyrics are said to be inspired by the heroism of the Caraquenian people, and the memory of the City of Red Roofs. Incidentally, the National Anthem of Venezuela, Gloria al Bravo Pueblo, includes the lines "...y si el despotismo levanta la voz, seguid el ejemplo que Caracas dio" ("...and if despotism raises its voice, follow the example that Caracas gave"), reflecting the fact that, in addition to generously providing many heroic fighters to the War of Independence, the junta established in Caracas (19 April 1810) served as inspiration for other regions to do the sameas did its declaration of independence a year later. Caracas has five municipalities: Baruta, El Hatillo, Chacao, Libertador and Sucre. Under the constitution of Venezuela, municipal governments have two branches: the executive (governed by a mayor) and the legislative (managed by a municipal council). In 8 March 2000, the year after a new constitution was introduced in Venezuela, it was decreed in Gaceta Official N 36,906 that the Metropolitan District of Caracas would be created, and that some of the powers of these municipalities would be delegated to the Alcalda Mayor, physically located in the large Libertador municipality, in the center of the city. Businesses that are located here include service companies, banks, and malls, among others. It has a largely service-based economy, apart from some industrial activity in its metropolitan area. The Caracas Stock Exchange and Petrleos de Venezuela (PDVSA) are headquartered here. The PDVSA is the largest company in Venezuela, and negotiates all the international agreements for the distribution and export of petroleum. When the company existed, the airline Viasa had its headquarters in the Torre Viasa. Caracas' central business district is Milla de Oro, which is located in the north of the Baruta municipality and the south of the Chacao municipality, it is one of largest financial districts of Latin America, it is home to many companies and is dominated by numerous high-rises. Other important business districts include Plaza Venezuela, Parque Central Complex and El Recreo. Small and medium-size industry contributes to the Caracas economy. The city provides communication and transportation infrastructure between the metropolitan area and the rest of the country. Important industries in Caracas include chemicals, textiles, leather, food, iron and wood products. There are also rubber and cement factories. Its GDP(Nominal) is 69 billion $ and the GDP(PPP) per Capita is $24,000 A 2009 United Nations survey reported that the cost of living in Caracas was 89% of that of its baseline city: New York. However, this statistic is based upon a fixed currency-exchange-rate of 2003 and might not be completely realistic, due to the elevated inflation rates of the last several years. Caracas is contained entirely within a valley of the Venezuelan central range, and separated from the Caribbean coast by a roughly 15 kilometres (9 miles) expanse of El vila National Park. The valley is relatively small and quite irregular, the altitude with respect to sea level varies from between 870 and 1,043 meters (2,854 and 3,422 ft), with 900 meters (3,000 feet) in the historic zone. This, along with the rapid population growth, has profoundly influenced the urban development of the city. The most elevated point of the Capital District, wherein the city is located, is the Pico El vila, which rises to 2,159 meters (7,083 feet). The main body of water in Caracas is the Guaire River, which flows across the city and empties into the Tuy River, which is also fed by the El Valle and San Pedro rivers, in addition to numerous streams which descend from El vila. The La Mariposa and Camatagua reservoirs provide water to the city. The city is occasionally subject to earthquakes - notably in 1641 and 1967. Under the Kppen climate classification, Caracas has a tropical savanna climate (Aw). Caracas is also intertropical, with precipitation that varies between 900 and 1,300 millimeters (35 and 51 inches) (annual), in the city proper, and up to 2,000 millimeters (79 inches) in some parts of the Mountain range. While Caracas is within the tropics, due to its altitude temperatures are generally not nearly as high as other tropical locations at sea level. The annual average temperature is approximately 23.8 C (75 F), with the average of the coldest month (January) 22.8 C (73 F) and the average of the warmest month (July) 25.0 C (77 F), which gives a small annual thermal amplitude of 2.2 C (4.0 F). In the months of December and January abundant fog may appear, in addition to a sudden nightly drop in temperature, until reaching 8 C (46 F). This peculiar weather is known by the natives of Caracas as the Pacheco. In addition, nightly temperatures at any time of the year are much (14 to 20 C) lower than daytime highs and usually do not remain above 24 C (75 F), resulting in very pleasant evening temperatures. Hail storms appear in Caracas, although only on rare occasions. Electrical storms are much more frequent, especially between June and October, due to the city being in a closed valley and the orographic action of Cerro El vila. Caracas record extremes have been reported in other city's stations to reach a minimum of 6 C (43 F) and a maximum of 35.5 C (95.9 F) According to the population census of 2011 the Caracas proper (Distrito Capital) is over 3.0 million inhabitants, while that of the Metropolitan District of Caracas is estimated at 5.4 million as of 2011. The vast majority of the population is composed from immigrants and their descendents primarily from Spain, Italy, Germany and Portugal. There is also a considerable Syrian and Lebanese population present in the country. Venezuela and its capital, Caracas, are reported to both have among the highest per capita murder rates in the world. Most murders and other violent crimes go unsolved. The poor neighborhoods that cover the hills around Caracas are dangerous at all times. However, recent research has suggested that the government misreported the actual population of Caracas, which may have skewed crime figures higher. Adjusted for population, the official 2010 homicide rate in Caracas falls to 71 per 100,000 . Even though this is still a high number, it is 33% less than the figures usually reported by international media outlets; the discrepancy originates from the outdated population data that was held by the CICPC (a police agency) in Caracas. The Federal Capitol occupies an entire city block, and, with its golden domes and neoclassical pediments, can seem even bigger. The building was commissioned by Antonio Guzmn Blanco in the 1870s, and is most famous for its Saln Elptico, an oval hall with a mural-covered dome and walls lined with portraits of the country's great and good. The nearby Palacio Municipal de Caracas dating from 1696 was renovated in the Neoclassical style in 1906 and now serves as the city hall and the Caracas Museum. The Caracas East Park (Parque del Este, now officially Parque Generalsimo Francisco de Miranda) was designed by Brazilian architect Roberto Burle Marx. It is a green paradise in the middle of the city, and it contains a small zoo. A replica of the ship led by Francisco de Miranda, the Leander, is being built in the southern part of the park. Before there used to exist a replica of the Santa Maria ship, used by Christopher Colombus in his voyages to America. The Teresa Carreo Cultural Complex (Complejo Cultural Teresa Carreo), or more commonly the Teresa Carreo Theatre (Teatro Teresa Carreo), is by far the most important theater of Caracas and Venezuela. The theater presents symphonic and popular concerts, operas, ballet, and dramatic works. It is the second largest theater in South America, after the Teatro Coln of Buenos Aires, Argentina. Skyscrapers may loom overhead, but there is more than a hint of original colonial flavor in this neatly proportioned reconstruction of the house where Simon Bolivar was born on 24 July 1783. The museum's exhibits include period weapons, banners and uniforms. Much of the original colonial interior has been replaced by monumental paintings of battle scenes, but more personal relics can be seen in the nearby Bolivarian museum. The pride of the place goes to the coffin in which Bolivar's remains were brought from Colombia; his ashes now rest in the National Pantheon. Venezuela's most venerated building is five blocks north of Plaza Bolvar, on the northern edge of the old town. Formerly a church, the building was given its new purpose as the final resting place for eminent Venezuelans by Antonio Guzmn Blanco in 1874. At a short distance east of Plaza Bolvar is Parque Central, a concrete complex of five high-rise residential slabs of somewhat apocalyptic-appearing architecture, crowned by two 56-storey octagonal towers, one of them is under repair due to the fire which burnt the building on 17 October 2004. Parque Central is Caracas' art and culture hub, with museums, cinemas and the Teresa Carreo Cultural Complex. The West Tower balcony, on the 52nd floor, gives a 360 bird's-eye view of Caracas. Plaza Bolvar is the focus of the old town with the monument to El Libertador, Simon Bolvar, at its heart. Modern high-rise buildings have overpowered much of the colonial flavor of Caracas' founding neighbourhood. Plaza Venezuela is the geographic center of Caracas. It is a large urban plaza at the entrance of the Central University of Venezuela. Kinetic artists have displayed their works there, including Carlos Cruz-Diez, Alejandro Otero and Jesus Soto. East of the Plaza is the Plaza Venezuela Fountain, a large computerized display of water, music and colored light refurbished in 2009 to include the latest available technology. Plaza Caracas was constructed in 1983. It is in the Simn Bolvar Center. Plaza San Jacinto dates to 1603 and used to be the site of the city market Plaza Los Palos Grandes is a modern construction located at the municipality of Chacao. It has a display of water and a beautiful coffee shop. this plaza is the center of free yoga lessons for all the people that want to enjoy the city outdoors. It also has his own library. El Hatillo is a colonial town that is located at the south-east suburbs of Caracas in the municipal area of the same name. This small town, which is one of Venezuela's few well-preserved typical colonial areas, gives an idea of what Caracas was like in centuries past. Cerro El vila (Mountain El vila) (Indigenous name: Waraira Repano), is a mountain in the mid-North of Venezuela. It rises next to Caracas and separates the city from the Caribbean Sea. It is considered the lungs of Caracas because there is a lot of vegetation on it. This zone contains restaurants with varied gastronomical specialties, along with pubs, bars, pools and art galleries. Altamira is a neighborhood in the Chacao municipality of Caracas. It has its own Metro Station, many hotels, malls and restaurants, and is an important business and cultural centre. The Francisco de Miranda avenue (a major avenue in Caracas) and the Distibuidor Altamira (a congested highway exit) are both in Altamira. The Iglesia de San Francisco is of historical value. Bolvar's funeral was held here twelve years after his death. Here he was proclaimed Libertador in 1813 by the people of Caracas. The church has gilded baroque altarpieces, and retains much of its original colonial interior, despite being given a treatment in the 19th century under the auspices of Antonio Guzmn Blanco, which was intended to be modernizing. It contains some 17th-century masterpieces of art, carvings, sculptures and oil paintings. The Central University of Venezuela, established during the reign of Philip V, was lodged for centuries in the church cloisters next door, which today are the seat of the Language Academy, and the Academies of History, Physics, and Mathematics. Caracas Cathedral is the seat of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Caracas. The Mosque of Sheikh Ibrahim Al-Ibrahim is the second largest mosque in Latin America. For many years it was the biggest. The Union Israelita de Caracas is the biggest Synagogue for the Jewish Ashkenazi community in Caracas. Its mission is to host the religious services and preserve the memory of the Jewish heritage in Venezuela. Similarly, Mariperez is the biggest Synagogue for the Jewish Sephardic community in Caracas. The Central University of Venezuela (Universidad Central de Venezuela in Spanish) is a public University. Founded in 1721, it is the oldest university in Venezuela and one of the first in Latin America. The university campus was designed by architect Carlos Ral Villanueva and it was declared World Heritage by UNESCO in 2000. The Ciudad Universitaria de Caracas, as the main Campus is also known, is considered a masterpiece of architecture and urban planning and it is the only university campus designed in the 20th century that has received such recognition by UNESCO. The Simn Bolvar University (Universidad Simn Bolvar, in Spanish, or USB) is a public institution in Caracas that focuses on science and technology. Its motto is "La Universidad de la Excelencia" ("University of Excellence"). Academia Militar de Venezuela Escuela de Formacion de Oficiales de las Fuerzas Armadas de Cooperacin Instituto Venezolano de Investigaciones Cientficas Universidad Alejandro de Humboldt Universidad Bolivariana de Venezuela Universidad Catlica Andrs Bello Universidad Experimental Politcnica Antonio Jos de Sucre Universidad Jos Mara Vargas Universidad Metropolitana Universidad Monteavila Universidad Nacional Experimental de las Fuerzas Armadas (UNEFA) Universidad Nacional Experimental Simn Rodrguez Universidad Nueva Esparta Universidad Pedaggica Experimental Libertador Universidad Santa Maria British School of Caracas Colegio Internacional de Caracas Escuela Campo Alegre International Christian School There are professional Association Football, baseball and several other sports. Professional teams include Deportivo Petare, Caracas Ftbol Club, SD Centro Italo Venezolano, Estrella Roja FC and Real Esppor Club. The Deportivo Petare has reached the semifinals of international tournaments, such as the Copa Libertadores de America, while the Caracas Ftbol Club has reached the quarterfinals. Baseball teams Tiburones de La Guaira and Leones del Caracas play in the Estadio Universitario de la UCV, of the Central University of Venezuela, with a capacity of 26,000 spectators. Another baseball team started in Caracas: the Navegantes del Magallanes. It was moved to Valencia, Carabobo in the 1970s. Association Football stadiums include: Estadio Olmpico de la UCV, with capacity of 30 000 spectators is seat of the Deportivo Italia and Caracas Ftbol Club. Brgido Iriarte stadium, with a capacity of 12 000 spectators (old seat of the Deportivo Italia and Caracas Ftbol Club, and seat of the Estrella Roja FC). The Caracas Ftbol Club opened its own stadium in 2005, Campo Deportivo Cocodrilos. Cocodrilos de Caracas plays in the Venezuelan professional basketball league. They play their games in the "Gimnasio Jos Beracasa" in the neighbourhood of El Paraso. Caracas is the seat of the National Institute of Sports and of the Venezuelan Olympic Committee. Caracas hosted the 1983 Pan American Games. Association Football: Caracas Ftbol Club, Deportivo Petare, Atletico Venezuela, Estrella Roja Futbol club, Real Esppor Club. Baseball: Tiburones de la Guaira, Leones del Caracas. Basketball: Cocodrilos de Caracas. Caracas is Venezuela's cultural capital, with many restaurants, theaters, museums, and shopping centers. The city is home to an array of immigrants from but not limited to: Spain, Italy, Portugal, the Middle East, Germany, China, and Latin American countries. Caracas has a gastronomical heritage due to the influence of immigrants, leading to a choice of regional and international cuisine. There are a variety of international restaurants including American, French, Lebanese, Italian, Spanish, Indian, Chinese, Peruvian, Japanese, Mediterranean and Mexican. The district of La Candelaria contains Spanish restaurants, resulting from Galician and Canarian immigrants that came to the area in the mid-20th century. Caracas has been the birthplace of many politicians, scientists, end artists who notably shaped the country's history and culture: Andrs Bello Baruj Benacerraf- shared the 1980 Nobel Prize in Physiology. Antonio Guzmn Blanco Serge Blanco Simn Bolvar, father of independence in South America Jacobo Borges Alfonso Carrasquel Johnny Cecotto Jacinto Convit Carlos Cruz-Diez Carlos Delgado Chalbaud Daniel Dhers Andrs Galarraga Astrid Carolina Herrera - Miss Venezuela World 1984, Miss World 1984 Francisco Herrera Luque Dayana Mendoza - Miss Venezuela 2007, Miss Universe 2008 Lorenzo Mendoza Francisco de Miranda Gabriela Montero Carlos Morocho Hernandez Aquiles Nazoa Barbara Palacios Teyde - Miss Venezuela 1986, Miss Universe 1986 Isaac J Pardo Fernando Paz Castillo Armando Revern Francisco Rodriguez Aldemaro Romero Jr. Alfredo Sadel Irene Saez - Miss Venezuela 1981, Miss Universe 1981 Fermn Toro Csar Tovar Jorge Liberato Urosa Savino Arturo Uslar-Pietri Greivis Vasquez Juan Antonio Prez Bonalde Juan Bautista Plaza Juan Pablo Prez Alfonso Juan Vicente Torrealba Manuel Blum Marcel Roche Mariano Montilla Maritza Sayalero - Miss Venezuela 1979, Miss Universe 1979 Martn Tovar y Tovar Omar Vizquel Oscar D'Len Pedro Gual Reynaldo Hahn Stefana Fernndez - Miss Venezuela 2008, Miss Universe 2009 Simn Rodrguez Teresa Carreo Tina Ramirez Vicente Nebrada Gabriela Isler - Miss Venezuela 2012, Miss Universe 2013 The Caracas Metro has been in operation since 27 March 1983. With 4 lines, 47 stations and about 10 more to be constructed. It covers a great part of the city and also has an integrated ticket system that combines the route of the Metro with those offered by the Metrobs, a bus service of the Caracas Metro. In 2010, the first segment of a new ariel cable car system opened, Metrocable which feeds into the larger metro system. Buses are the main means of mass transportation. There are two bus systems: the traditional system and the Metrobs. The traditional system runs a variety of bus types, operated by several companies on normal streets and avenues: Autobus; large buses. Camioneta; medium size buses. microbus or camionetica; vans or minivans. IFE; train services to and from Tuy Valley cities of Charallave and Ca. Simn Bolvar International Airport, the biggest and most important in the country is located outside the city, roughly 32 kilometres (20 mi) from the downtown area. Caracas Aerial Tramway The Los Teques Metro is a suburban mass-transit system completed in 2006 that connects Caracas with the suburban city of Los Teques. In March 2009 four of the five Caracas districts launched Plan Va Libre to reduce traffic (the pro-Chavez Jorge Rodrguez' Libertador District is currently not cooperating as the other districts are in the hands of the opposition). On each weekday, cars with certain number plates are banned from entering key parts of the city centre; the numbers rotate so that any particular car is banned one day a week. Generalisimo Francisco de Miranda airbase used by military aviation and govern aeroplane. Caracas is twinned with: Caracas is part of the Union of Ibero-American Capital Cities from 12 October 1982 establishing brotherly relations with the following cities: 