L'enfant et la vie familiale sous l'ancien rgime (English: The Child and Family Life in the Old Rgime) is a 1960 book on the history of childhood by French historian Philippe Aris known in English by its 1962 translation, Centuries of Childhood: A Social History of Family Life. It is considered the most famous book on the subject, and known for its argument that the concept of "childhood" is a modern development. The book argues that childhood as an idea has changed over time. It covers the concepts of childhood, adultchild relations, and childhood experience across cultures and time periods. His most well-known sources are medieval paintings that show children as small adults. Aris argues that childhood was not understood as a separate stage of life until the 15th century, and children were seen as little adults who shared the same traditions, games, and clothes. Its most famous conclusions are that "childhood" is a recent idea, and that parenting in the Middle Ages was largely detached. Aris claims the following: Nuclear family bonds of love and concern did not exist in the era, and children died too often to become emotionally attached. Children weren't treated as delicate or protected from sexuality. They spent time with adults outside of family structures, and were not always segregated to school and family structures. Often they would be fostered to others as domestic servants. Despite the book's fame for its thesis, Centuries of Childhood focuses more on the beginnings of systematized schooling and the decline of a common public sociability. This focus extends from the author's greater criticism of modern life and its schism of social elements he saw to be once united: "friendship, religion, [and] profession". In this way, Aris did not believe modern families adequately replace the role of common public community. Writing for the American Historical Review in 1998, Hugh Cunningham states that the book's influence "remains profound" after forty years, especially with respect to medieval childhood. He added that Aris successfully persuaded his readers that the experience of childhood and its treatment as a stage of life had evolved across time and place. The book began the study of the history of childhood, which led to monographs on histories of individual aspects of childhood. A misleading translation of the French sentiment into "idea" became one of the translation's best known lines, "In medieval society the idea of childhood did not exist", and led to a "mini-industry" of medieval scholars rebutting this false thesis. The popular view of Aris thesis was dismantled over the coming decades. Slate's Stephen Metcalf describes an "anti-Arisist" cottage industry whose most notable include historians Steven Ozment and Nicholas Orme. Orme wrote Medieval Children, a book dedicated to refuting the Aris thesis, which reviewers agree it did. Orme concluded that "medieval children were ourselves, five hundred or a thousand years ago" and that their parents genuinely cherished and grieved for their children, similar to modern parents. Despite these decades of refutation, the Aris thesis persists in non-academics, who associate medieval children with "miniature adults". The book had considerable academic influence and began a trend in the humanities where studied ideas are seen as caused by culture rather than by nature, biology, or self. Metcalf described Centuries of Childhood as a book "that, virtually on contact, sets the mind on fire" for its imagination, especially as written in 1960, a time of childhood's expansion. Metcalf asserted that Aris' method of cultural causes influenced Michel Foucault's thinking, which has since touched most academic disciplines. 