Central Visayas (Filipino: Gitnang Kabisayaan) is a region of the Philippines, designated as Region VII. It is located in the central part of the Visayas island group, and consists of three provincesBohol, Cebu, and Siquijor and the highly urbanized cities of Cebu City, Lapu-Lapu, and Mandaue. The region is dominated by the native speakers of Cebuano. Cebu City is its regional center. The land area of the region is 9,659.19 km. As of the 2010 census, it has a population of 6,800,180 people, making it the 5th most populous of the country's 17 regions. Regions first came to existence in on September 24, 1972, when the provinces of the Philippines were organized into 11 regions by Presidential Decree No. 1 as part of the Integrated Reorganization Plan of President Ferdinand Marcos. By virtue of Executive Order No. 183 issued on May 29, 2015 by President Benigno Aquino III, the province of Negros Oriental was transferred to the Negros Island Region. As of the 2010 census, Central Visayas had a population of 6,800,180 people, making it the 5th most populous of the country's 17 regions. At the 2007 census, the population was 6,398,628 with a population density of 403.1 people per square kilometer (6,129.4/mi). The 2007 census showed an average annual population growth rate of 1.59% from 2000 to 2007, significantly less than the national average of 2.04%. Cebuano is the dominant language of the region. Boholano is a dialectal variant of Cebuano spoken in Bohol. In the Camotes Islands, which is part of Cebu, Cebuano language is spoken in the towns of Tudela, Pilar and San Francisco. Except the town of Poro, in which, Porohanon is spoken (a variation or mixture of Cebuano, Hiligaynon (Ilonggo) and Masbateo language, with 87% Cebuano vocabulary). Tagalog, English, and Spanish are also spoken in this region. The Central Visayas region is composed of 3 provinces and 3 independent cities: Negros Oriental was formerly a part of Region VII. President Benigno Aquino III signed the Executive Order No.183, creating the Negros Island Region. AAlthough Cebu City, Mandaue City and Lapu-Lapu City are often grouped under the province of Cebu for statistical purposes by the National Statistics Office, as highly urbanized cities, they are administratively independent from the province. = Bogo, Cebu Carcar, Cebu Danao, Cebu Naga, Cebu Talisay, Cebu Toledo, Cebu Tagbilaran, Bohol Cebu City is the main media hub for both the region and the island of Visayas. It is the home to many media outlets for both the million-nighttime and the 4-million daytime population of the city. Large media networks such as ABS-CBN Corporation, GMA Network, Inc., TV5, People's Television Network, and 9TV maintain their respective local stations and branches for viewership, commercial and news coverage purposes. Most of these stations broadcast local news and public affairs as well as entertainment and dramas to cater the local viewers. Cable television operators are putting up cable TV stations in an effort to spread the TV signals all over the region. They also offer free worldwide array of television stations for various channels for news, sports, drama, cartoons, and advertisements. Aside from the 24 national daily newspapers available, Cebu City also has 20 local newspapers. Among the widely read are the Sun Star Cebu. The country's main Islamic news journal, The Voice of Islam, was founded in 1961 and published in this city. Broadcast Television networks ABS-CBN: Channel 3 ABS-CBN Sports and Action: Channel 23 CNN Philippines: Channel 9 ETC: Channel 6 2nd Avenue: Channel 33 BEAM: Channel 31 IBC: Channel 13 CCTN: Channel 47 TV5: Channel 21 AksyonTV: Channel 29 GMA Network: Channel 7 GMA News TV: Channel 27 Cable Television channels Balls: SkyCable Cebu Ch. 301 Lifestyle Network: SkyCable Cebu Ch. 601 Jack TV: SkyCable Cebu Ch. 617 DYAB TeleRadyo: SkyCable Cebu Ch. 38 Solar Sports: SkyCable Cebu Ch. 72 ABS-CBN Cebu TV Shows TV Patrol Central Visayas Tubag! With Leo Lastimosa Kapamilya Winner Ka Maayong Buntag Kapamilya MAG TV Na! GMA Cebu TV Shows 24 Oras Central Visayas Monday-Friday 5:05 pm5:50 pm Buena Mano Balita (Balita at Ibapa) Monday-Friday 6:35 am8:35 am Central Visayas Isyu Karon Saturdays 7am-8am TV5 Cebu TV Shows Aksyon Alerto (News Update) Aksyon Bisaya Good Morning Cebu CNN Philippines Cebu TV Shows Cebuano News Monday-Friday 1:00 pm-1:30 pm CCTN Cebu TV Shows Sayri 47 (formerly CCTN News) CCTN Newsbreak (News Update) Balita sa Alas Dose The Port of Cebu is the region's main gateway. There are also ports in Tagbilaran in Bohol and Larena in Siquijor. Inter-island shipping is served by numerous shipping lines, two of them fastcraft companies which serve all the provinces in the region. The Mactan-Cebu International Airport, located in Lapu-Lapu City, is the country's second busiest airport (after Ninoy Aquino International Airport in Metro Manila) and the only airport in the Visayas serving international flights (aside from Kalibo International Airport). It is an airline hub of Cebu Pacific, Philippine Airlines, PAL Express, and Air Philippines, with flights to key cities throughout the country. It also serves international flights to other Asian destinations. Other airports in the region are Tagbilaran Airport, serves Tagbilaran and Bohol with flights to Manila. 