A chamfer /tm.fr/ is a transitional edge between two vertices of an object. It can also be known as a bevel but connotes more often cutting and more often 45. If the un-chamfered intersection of the adjoining faces would otherwise form a right angle, 90 as is most common, the chamfer will typically be uniform and pitched at 45. A fully chamfered square interior would thus be octagonal. (By contrast, a fillet is the rounding off of an interior corner, and a rounding of an exterior corner is called a "round". or a "radius") "Chamfer" is a term commonly used in mechanical and manufacturing engineering. Special tools such as chamfer mills and chamfer planes are available. In tile work, or furniture such as counters or table tops, an edge or arris that has been eased by rounding instead of chamfering is called a bullnose. Where a chamfer does not go to the end of the piece, but "lifts out" in a smooth curve, the end is called a lark's tongue usually seen as a pair in these fields. In non-aesthetic uses, chamfers are necessary in parabolic glass mirror manufacture and desirable in certain printed circuit boards. In architecture, the base of the Taj Mahal is a cube with chamfered corners, thereby creating an octagonal architectural footprint. Its great gate is formed of chamfered base stones and chamfered corbels for a balcony or equivalent cornice towards the roof. Many street corners (curbs) in Barcelona, Spain, and in Ponce, Puerto Rico, are chamfered. This allows for the turn while driving to be somewhat more comfortable as drivers do not need to slow down as much when making a turn as they would have to if the corner were a square 90 degrees. It also reduces the likelihood of tire damage. Outside of aesthetics, chamfering is part of the process of hand-crafting a parabolic glass telescope mirror. Before the surface of the disc can be ground, the edges must first be chamfered to prevent chipping. This can be accomplished by placing the disc in a metal bowl containing silicon carbide and rotating the disc with a rocking motion. The grit will thus wear off the sharp edge of the glass. In printed circuit board (PCB) designing, a chamfer occurs when a right-angled edge is eliminated from the tracks, to strengthen the places where a track meets another at a right angle. It also reduces reflections; important for high-frequency design. 