In geometry, the circle of antisimilitude (also known as mid-circle) of two circles, and , is a circle for which and are inverses of each other. If and are non-intersecting or tangent, there exists one circle of antisimilitude; if and intersect at two points, there exist two circles of antisimilitude. When and are congruent, the circle of antisimilitude is degenerate; it becomes a line of symmetry, in which and are reflections of each other. If the two circles and cross each other, another two circles and are each tangent to both and , and in addition and are tangent to each other, then the point of tangency between and necessarily lies on one of the two circles of antisimilitude. If and are disjoint and non-concentric, then the locus of points of tangency of and again forms two circles, but only one of these is the (unique) circle of antisimilitude. If and are tangent or concentric, then the locus of points of tangency degenerates to a single circle, which again is the circle of antisimilitude. If the two circles and cross each other, then their two circles of antisimilitude each pass through both crossing points, and bisect the angles formed by the arcs of and as they cross. If a circle crosses circles and at equal angles, then is crossed orthogonally by one of the circles of antisimilitude of and ; if crosses and in supplementary angles, it is crossed orthogonally by the other circle of antisimilitude, and if is orthogonal to both and then it is also orthogonal to both circles of antisimilitude. Suppose that, for three circles , , and , there is a circle of antisimilitude for the pair (,) that crosses a second circle of antisimilitude for the pair (,). Then there is a third circle of antisimiltude for the third pair (,) such that the three circles of antisimilitude cross each other in two triple intersection points. Altogether, at most eight triple crossing points may be generated in this way, for there are two ways of choosing each of the first two circles and two points where the two chosen circles cross. These eight or fewer triple crossing points are the centers of inversions that take all three circles , , and to become equal circles. For three circles that are mutually externally tangent, the (unique) circles of antisimilitude for each pair again cross each other at 120 angles in two triple intersection points that are the isodynamic points of the triangle formed by the three points of tangency. 