Cockeyed.com is a website that covers a variety of subjects, most of which are projects undertaken by the site's creator, Rob Cockerham. As the creator lives in Sacramento, California, many of his projects take place in notable Sacramento landmarks, such as Arden Fair Mall and Arco Arena. One of the most popular articles is called "How Much is Inside", which has been put together one episode at a time since 1998. There are more than 40 episodes online. Other sections are the Pranks, the educational Science Club and Cockerham's Incredible Creations, all of which are presented with pictures detailing the steps of the project. Cockerham has also used the site as a platform to locate and harass spammers. A particular focus of the website is the multi-level marketing business opportunity from Herbalife. Rob has dedicated many pages to criticizing its independent distributors' use of signs in public spaces as well as the Herbalife business model. Rob Cockerham has made appearances regarding Cockeyed.com on NPR, 20/20 and in a segment during the 24 Hours of Foo event on MTV2. This largest section of Cockeyed.com contains documentation of projects in which Cockerham and his friends measure the usefulness of products, including: How much gold is inside Goldschlger? An estimate to the ratio of various nuts inside Mixed nuts Measuring the average length of Ramen noodles Counting the distribution of color and phrasing in a bag of Conversation Hearts Counting how many chips can be dipped in one can of Salsa Other "How Much is Inside?" projects measure the utility of: Paper towels, Sharpie pens, A Christmas tree, Bacon Bits, Dial Complete soap, A Pumpkin, An Acre, A Keg of beer, Spaghetti, Popcorn bag, Vegemite spread, A Chevy Trailblazer, A Million Dollars, Dust-Off can, Handrolling Tobacco, Oreos cookies, a pound of ground Coffee beans, Coca-Cola bottle, french fries, Ketchup, Print Cartridge, Chewing Gum, 40-Foot Shipping Container, Magic Shell, Batteries, Doritos, Cheerios, Newspaper, Lipstick, Silly string, "Blood", Aluminum foil, Expanding Foam, Whipped cream, EZ Cheese, Toothpaste and one fake measurement of Shaving cream. Rather than using statistical methods to estimate the contents, the group favors measuring the amounts. For example, to figure out how much is inside of a keg, they (and an invited group of "fellow scientists") poured and consumed 141 individual cups of beer. A simpler (but less interesting) way to determine the amount would have been to simply calculate the volume of the keg and divide by the volume of each cup. 