Conway polyhedron notation is used to describe polyhedra based on a seed polyhedron modified by various operations. The seed polyhedra are the Platonic solids, represented by the first letter of their name (T,O,C,I,D); the prisms (Pn), antiprisms (An) and pyramids (Yn). Any convex polyhedron can serve as a seed, as long as the operations can be executed on it. John Conway extended the idea of using operators, like truncation defined by Kepler, to build related polyhedra of the same symmetry. His descriptive operators can generate all the Archimedean solids and Catalan solids from regular seeds. Applied in a series, these operators allow many higher order polyhedra to be generated. Elements are given from the seed (v,e,f) to the new forms, assuming seed is a convex polyhedron: (a topological sphere, Euler characteristic = 2) An example image is given for each operation, based on a cubic seed. Note: * - The half operator, h, reduces square faces into digons, with two coinciding edges, which can be replaced by a single edge. Otherwise digons have a topological existence which can be subsequently truncated back into square faces. Special forms The kis operator has a variation, kn, which only adds pyramids to n-sided faces. The truncate operator has a variation, tn, which only truncates order-n vertices. The operators are applied like functions from right to left. For example: the dual of a tetrahedron is dT; the truncation of a cube is t3C or tC; the truncation of a cuboctahedron is t4aC or taC. All operations are symmetry-preserving except twisting ones like s and g which lose reflection symmetry. All of the five regular polyhedra can be generated from prismatic generators with zero to two operators: Triangular pyramid: Y3 (A tetrahedron is a special pyramid) T = Y3 O = aY3 (ambo tetrahedron) C = jY3 (join tetrahedron) I = sY3 (snub tetrahedron) D = gY3 (gyro tetrahedron) Triangular antiprism: A3 (An octahedron is a special antiprism) O = A3 C = dA3 Square prism: P4 (A cube is a special prism) C = P4 Pentagonal antiprism: A5 I = k5A5 (A special gyroelongated dipyramid) D = t5dA5 (A special truncated trapezohedron) The regular Euclidean tilings can also be used as seeds: Q = Quadrille =Square tiling H = Hextille = Hexagonal tiling = d = Deltille = Triangular tiling = dH The above operations allow all of the semiregular polyhedrons and Catalan solids to be generated from regular polyhedrons. Combined many higher operations can be made, but many interesting higher order polyhedra require new operators to be constructed. For example, geometric artist George W. Hart created an operation he called a propellor, and another reflect to create mirror images of the rotated forms. p "propellor" (A rotation operator that creates quadrilaterals at the vertices). This operation is self-dual: dpX=pdX. r "reflect" makes the mirror image of the seed; it has no effect unless the seed was made with s or g. The cube can generate all the convex uniform polyhedra with octahedral symmetry. The first row generates the Archimedean solids and the second row the Catalan solids, the second row forms being duals of the first. Comparing each new polyhedron with the cube, each operation can be visually understood. (Two polyhedron forms don't have single operator names given by Conway.) The truncated icosahedron as a nonregular seed creates more polyhedra which are not vertex or face uniform. In general the seed polyhedron can be considered a tiling of a surface since the operators represent topological operations so the exact geometric positions of the vertices of the derived forms are not defined in general. A convex regular polyhedron seed can be considered a tiling on a sphere, and so the derived polyhedron can equally be assumed to be positioned on the surface of a sphere. Similar a regular tiling on a plane, such as a hexagonal tiling can be a seed tiling for derived tilings. Nonconvex polyhedra can become seeds if a related topological surface is defined to constrain the positions of the vertices. For example toroidal polyhedra can derive other polyhedra with point on the same torus surface. Iterating operators on simple forms can produce progressively larger polyhedra, maintaining the fundamental symmetry of the seed element. The vertices are assumed to be on the same spherical radius. Some generated forms can exist as spherical tilings, but fail to produce polyhedra with planar faces. Rhombic: Triangular: Dual triangular: Triangular chiral: Dual triangular chiral: 