The Coup of 30 Prairial Year VII (Coup d'tat du 30 prairial an VII), also known as the Revenge of the Councils (revanche des conseils) was a bloodless coup in France that occurred on 18 June 179930 Prairial Year VII by the French Republican Calendar. It left Emmanuel-Joseph Sieys as the dominant figure of the French government, and prefigured the coup of 18 Brumaire that brought Napoleon Bonaparte to power. The Council of Five Hundredthe lower house in the legislature under the French Directoryhad become unhappy with the directors' conduct of the war, and in particular with their recall of General Jean tienne Vachier Championnet, a former Jacobin. The Council of Ancients and Council of Five Hundredthe two legislative branches under the French Directoryvoted an act declaring that the election of Director Jean-Baptiste Treilhard had been illegal, and on 29 Prairial/17 June had replaced him with Louis Gohier, erstwhile Jacobin deputy and minister during the French Convention. But the Councils were not satisfied with one removal. Director Emmanuel-Joseph Sieys shared, in some degree, the Councils' sentiments. He was glad to see his colleagues removed, and was perfectly willing to work with Jacobin generals to achieve his ends. In the Council of Five Hundred deputy Antoine, comte Boulay de la Meurthe, generally seen as a moderate, demanded the resignation or removal of directors Louis-Marie de La Rvellire-Lpeaux and Philippe Antoine Merlin de Douai. In this he was soon joined not only by his own Council but by the Council of Ancients, and by directors Paul Barras and Sieys. When Rvellire de Lpeaux and Merlin de Douai resisted, General Barthlmy Catherine Joubert, recently placed in command of the 17th military division (Paris) organized some troop movements of soldiers in Paris. By evening, Rvellire-Lpeaux and Merlin had tendered their resignations. Although nothing in this sequence of events formally violated the French Constitution of 1795, it is generally considered a coup. 