In geometry, a cross-polytope, orthoplex, hyperoctahedron, or cocube is a regular, convex polytope that exists in any number of dimensions. The vertices of a cross-polytope are all the permutations of (1, 0, 0, , 0). The cross-polytope is the convex hull of its vertices. Its facets are simplexes of the previous dimension, while the cross-polytope's vertex figure is another cross-polytope from the previous dimension. The n-dimensional cross-polytope can also be defined as the closed unit ball (or, according to some authors, its boundary) in the 1-norm on Rn: In 1 dimension the cross-polytope is simply the line segment [1, +1], in 2 dimensions it is a square (or diamond) with vertices {(1, 0), (0, 1)}. In 3 dimensions it is an octahedronone of the five convex regular polyhedra known as the Platonic solids. Higher-dimensional cross-polytopes are generalizations of these. The cross-polytope is the dual polytope of the hypercube. The 1-skeleton of a n-dimensional cross-polytope is a Turn graph T(2n,n). The 4-dimensional cross-polytope also goes by the name hexadecachoron or 16-cell. It is one of six convex regular 4-polytopes. These 4-polytopes were first described by the Swiss mathematician Ludwig Schlfli in the mid-19th century. The cross polytope family is one of three regular polytope families, labeled by Coxeter as n, the other two being the hypercube family, labeled as n, and the simplices, labeled as n. A fourth family, the infinite tessellations of hypercubes, he labeled as n. The n-dimensional cross-polytope has 2n vertices, and 2n facets (n1 dimensional components) all of which are n1 simplices. The vertex figures are all n 1 cross-polytopes. The Schlfli symbol of the cross-polytope is {3,3,,3,4}. The dihedral angle of the n-dimensional cross-polytope is . The number of k-dimensional components (vertices, edges, faces, , facets) in an n-dimensional cross-polytope is given by (see binomial coefficient): The volume of the n-dimensional cross-polytope is There are many possible orthographic projections that can show the cross-polytopes as 2-dimensional graphs. Petrie polygon projections map the points into a regular 2n-gon or lower order regular polygons. A second projection takes the 2(n-1)-gon petrie polygon of the lower dimension, seen as a bipyramid, projected down the axis, with 2 vertices mapped into the center. The vertices of an axis-aligned cross polytope are all at equal distance from each other in the Manhattan distance (L1 norm). Kusner's conjecture states that this set of 2d points is the largest possible equidistant set for this distance. 