The Democratic Party of Japan (, Minshut) is a centrist political party in Japan founded in 1998 by the merger of several opposition parties. After the 2009 election, the DPJ became the ruling party in the House of Representatives, defeating the long-dominant Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) and gaining the largest number of seats in both the House of Representatives and the House of Councillors. After winning a landslide victory in 2009, it was ousted from government by the LDP in the 2012 general election. It retained 57 seats in the lower house, and still had 88 seats in the upper house. During its time in office, the DPJ was beset by internal conflicts and struggled to implement many of its proposed policies, an outcome described by political scientists as the "paradox of political change without policy change." Legislative productivity under the DPJ was particularly low, falling to levels unprecedented in recent Japanese history according to some measures. However, the DPJ implemented a number of progressive measures during its time in office such as the provision of free public schooling through high school, increases in child-rearing subsidies, expanded unemployment insurance coverage, extended duration of a housing allowance, and stricter regulations safeguarding part-time and temporary workers. It is not to be confused with the now-defunct Japan Democratic Party that merged with the Liberal Party in 1955 to form the Liberal Democratic Party. It is also different from another Democratic Party, which was established in 1947 and dissolved in 1950. The Democratic Party of Japan (DPJ) call their philosophy Democratic Centrism (ja:, minshu-chd), which was determined in the first party convention on April 27, 1998. The DPJ claim themselves to be revolutionary in that they are against the status quo and the current governing establishment. The DPJ argue that the bureaucracy and the size of the Japanese government is too large, inefficient, and saturated with cronies and that the Japanese state is too conservative and stiff. The DPJ wants to "overthrow the ancient rgime locked in old thinking and vested interests, solve the problems at hand, and create a new, flexible, affluent society which values people's individuality and vitality." Democratic Centrism pursues the following five goals. Transparent, just and fair society The Democratic Party seek to build a society governed with rules which are transparent, just and fair. Free market and inclusive society While the party argue that the free market system should "permeate" economic life, they also aim for an inclusive society which guarantees security, safety, and fair and equal opportunity for each individual. Decentralized and participatory society The party intend to devolve the centralized government powers to citizens, markets, and local governments so that people of all backgrounds can participate in decision-making. Compliance with the three constitutional principles The Democratic Party proclaim to hold the values in the meaning of the constitution to "embody the fundamental principles of the Constitution": popular sovereignty, respect for fundamental human rights, and pacifism. International relations based on self-reliance and mutual coexistence As a member of the global community, the party seek to establish Japan's international relations in the fraternal spirit of self-reliance and mutual coexistence to restore the world's trust in the country. The DPJ's policy platforms include the restructuring of civil service, monthly allowance to a family with children (26,000 per child), cut in gas tax, income support for farmers, free tuition for public high schools, banning of temporary work in manufacturing, raising the minimum-wage to 1,000 and halting of increase in sales tax for the next four years. Supreme Advisers Yoshihiko Noda, Hirotaka Akamatsu, Takahiro Yokomichi, Satsuki Eda President Katsuya Okada Acting President Akira Nagatsuma, Renh Vice Presidents: Toshimi Kitazawa Naoki Tanaka Kazuhiro Haraguchi Mieko Kamimoto Secretary General Yukio Edano Acting Secretary General Masaharu Nakagawa Chair, Policy Research Committee Goshi Hosono Acting Chair, Policy Research Committee Takeaki Matsumoto Chair, Diet Affairs Committee Yoshiaki Takaki Acting Chair, Diet Affairs Committee Jin Matsubara Chair, DPJ Caucus, House of Councillors Akira Gunji Secretary General, DPJ Caucus, House of Councillors Yuichiro Hata Chair, Diet Affairs Committee, DPJ Caucus, House of Councillors Kazuya Shimba Chair, Standing Officers Council Takeshi Maeda Chair, Gender Equality Promotion Headquarters - Mieko Kamimoto Chair, Election Campaign Committee Koichiro Gemba Chair, Administration Committee Shunichi Mizuoka Chair, Financial Committee Toshio Ogawa Chair, Organisation Committee Koichi Takemasa Chair, Public Relations Committee Kumiko Hayashi Chair, Corporate & External Organisations Committee Minoru Yanagida Chair, National Rallying and Canvassing Committee Takahiro Kuroiwa Chair, Women Committee Makiko Kikuta Chair, Youth Committee Takahiro Kuroiwa Chair, General Meeting of DPJ Diet Members - Masayuki Naoshima The DPJ has some political factions or groups, although they are not as factionalized as the LDP, which has traditionally placed high priority on intra-party factional alignment. The groups are, from the most influential to the least influential: Ryun-kai (lit. 'Transcendent Association'): the second most conservative faction. Most of its members are from The Sakigake Party. Ryoun-kai has about 40 seats in the assembly and is led by Seiji Maehara and Yoshihiko Noda. Seiken kyaku wo Jitsugen suru kai (lit. 'Association for the Realization of Political Promises'): formed by defectors from LDP and led by former party leader Yukio Hatoyama, has about 30 conservative lawmakers in the Diet. Former name is 'Seiken kotai wo Jitsugen suru kai'. Minsha Kykai (lit. 'Democratic Socialist Group'): members of the former centrist Democratic Socialist Party which merged with the DPJ early on. About 25 members, led by Tatsuo Kawabata. Kuni no katachi kenkykai (lit. 'Country Form Research Society'): led by Party President Naoto Kan. Is a liberal leaning faction. About 20 members. Shin seikyoku kondankai (lit. 'Panel for a New Political Situation'): the most left-leaning faction, created by members of the former Japan Socialist Party who felt the Social Democratic Party was too radical. About 20 seats, led by Takahiro Yokomichi. The Independents Club is a minor political party which forms a political entity with the DPJ in both chambers of the house. The Presidents of Democratic Party of Japan (ja:, Minshut Daihy), the formal name is (Minshut Jynin-Kanji-Kai Daihy). All-time highest values are bolded 