DenmarkNorway (Danish and Norwegian: DanmarkNorge; German: DnemarkNorwegen) is a former political entity consisting of the united kingdoms of Denmark and Norway, including overseas Norwegian dependencies of Iceland, Greenland, the Faroe Islands, and the Northern Isles. The once extensive and influential Kingdom of Norway was devastated by the Black Death to a greater extent than Denmark and Sweden, forcing Norway into personal union with Denmark and ultimately forming the Kalmar Union with Sweden. Following the departure of Sweden from the Kalmar Union and its subsequent dissolution, in 1524 Denmark and Norway entered into a personal union under Danish hegemony, due to Norway's weakened position after The Plague. In 1536 the kingdom of Norway was formally integrated into Denmark, and as a consequence its Council of the Realm was abolished. However, Norway continued to have separate institutions and its own laws. The union's most important political institutions and monumental palaces were built in Denmark, strategically in order to restrain Norway from rising to great power as possessed during the Viking Age. Norway was re-established as a kingdom in 1660 after the introduction of absolutism. The personal union of the two kingdoms lasted until 1814, when the victorious powers of the Napoleonic wars forced the king of Denmark-Norway to cede Norway to Sweden; Norway however resisted the attempt, but was forced to accept another personal union with Sweden on relatively equal terms after a short war with no winner. The Dano-Norwegian union had a lasting impact on Norway which maintained its cultural ties with Denmark. Denmark had purposely made Copenhagen the capital of the union in order to strengthen Denmark, and weaken Norway, throughout the union as upon its dissolution, making Denmark able to rob Norway of its medieval colonies in 1814. Norway throughout its union with Sweden used the Danish written language which descended from Old East Norse, as opposed to Classical Norwegian or Old West Norse, the legacy of which is present through the Icelandic Sagas as one of the classical European languages and literary works along with Latin and Ancient Greek. Old West Norse in a relatively well-preserved form is also the official language of the modern-day nations Iceland and the Faroe Islands. The corresponding adjective and demonym is "Dano-Norwegian". The term Kingdom of Denmark or just Denmark is sometimes used to include both countries in the period, since the political and economic power emanated from the Danish capital of Copenhagen. That power developed during the union based both on Danish noblemen and on wealthy Norwegians who attended the University, and were considered Danish because of their education and etiquette. These terms cover the "royal part" of the Oldenburgs as it was in 1460, excluding the "ducal part" of Schleswig and Holstein. The administration used two official languages, Danish and German, and for several centuries both a Danish and German Chancery existed. The term DenmarkNorway reflects the historical and legal roots of the union. It is adopted from the Oldenburg dynasty's official title. The kings always used the style "King of Denmark and Norway, the Wends and the Goths". Denmark and Norway, sometimes referred to as the "twin-realms" of DenmarkNorway, officially had separate legal codes and currencies, as well as mostly separate governing institutions, although following the introduction of absolutism in 1660 the centralisation of government meant a concentration of institutions in Copenhagen. The centralisation received great support in many parts of Norway, where the Swedish two-year attempt to control Trndelag resulted in massive losses and a catastrophic failure for the Swedes, allowing Norway to further secure itself militarily for the future through closer ties with the capital Copenhagen. The term SwedenFinland is sometimes, although with less justification, applied to the contemporary Swedish realm between 1521 and 1809. Finland was never a separate kingdom, and was completely integrated with Sweden, while Denmark was the dominant component in a personal union. Throughout the time of DenmarkNorway, it continuously had possession over various overseas territories. At the earliest times this meant areas in Northern Europe and North America, for instance Estonia and the Norwegian possessions of Greenland, the Faroe Islands and Iceland. From the 17th century, the kingdom acquired colonies in Africa, the Caribbean and India. DenmarkNorway maintained numerous colonies from the 17th to 19th centuries over various parts around India. Colonies included the town of Tranquebar and Serampore. The last towns it had control over were sold to the United Kingdom in 1845. Rights in the Nicobar Islands were sold in 1869. Centered around what is known as the Virgin Islands, DenmarkNorway established the Danish West Indies. This colony was one of the longest lived of Denmark, as it was sold to the United States in 1917, to become the U.S. Virgin Islands. In the Gold Coast region of West Africa, DenmarkNorway also over time had control over various colonies and forts. The last remaining forts were sold to the United Kingdom in 1850. The Scandinavians were Christianized in the 10th13th centuries, resulting in three consolidated kingdoms. Denmark forged from the three Lands of Denmark (including Blekinge, Halland and Skne in modern-day Sweden and Southern Schleswig in modern Germany). Sweden forged from the Lands of Sweden (most of Svealand, Gtaland and Finland). Norway forged from various petty kingdoms (including Bhuslen, Herjedalen, Jemtland and Idre & Srna) plus overseas possessions of Shetland and Orkney (from approximately 9th century), Faroe Islands (from 1035), Greenland and Iceland (from 126162). The three kingdoms then united in the Kalmar Union in 1397. Sweden broke out of this union and re-entered it several times, until 1521, when Sweden finally left the Union, leaving DenmarkNorway (including overseas possessions in the North Atlantic as well as the island of Saaremaa in modern Estonia). The outbreak of the Northern Seven Years' War in 1563 is mainly attributed to Denmark's displeasure over the dismantling of the Kalmar Union in the 1520s. When the Danish king Christian III (reigned 15341559) included the traditionally Swedish insignia of three crowns into his own coat of arms, the Swedes interpreted this as a Danish claim over Sweden. In response Erik XIV of Sweden (reigned 15601568) added the insignia of Norway and Denmark to his own coat of arms. After Swedish king Erik introduced obstacles in an attempt to hinder trade with Russia, Lbeck and the PolishLithuanian Commonwealth joined Denmark in a war alliance. Denmark then carried out some naval attacks on Sweden, which effectively started the war. After seven years of fighting, the conflict concluded in 1570 with a status quo ante bellum. Because of DenmarkNorway's dominion over the Baltic Sea (dominium maris baltici) and the North Sea, Sweden had the intention of avoiding paying Denmark's Sound Toll. Swedish king Charles IX's way of accomplishing this was to try to set up a new trade route through Lapland and northern Norway. In 1607 Charles IX declared himself "King of the Lapps in Nordland", and started collecting taxes in Norwegian territory. Denmark and king Christian IV of Denmark protested against the Swedish actions, as they had no intentions of letting another independent trade route open, Christian IV also had an intent of forcing Sweden to rejoin its union with Denmark. In 1611 Denmark finally invaded Sweden with 6000 men and took the city of Kalmar. Eventually on January 20, 1613, the Treaty of Knred was signed in which Norway's land route from Sweden was regained by incorporating Lapland into Norway, and Swedish payment of a high ransom of 1 million silver riksdaler for two fortresses which Denmark had taken in the war. However, Sweden achieved an exemption from the Sound Toll, which had only previously been secured by Britain and Holland. = The great ransom paid by Sweden (called the lvsborg Ransom) was used by Christian IV, amongst many other things, to found the cities of Glckstadt, Christiania (refounded after a fire), Christians have, Christianstad and Christianssand. He also founded the Danish East India Company which led to the establishment of numerous Danish colonies in India. Not long after the Kalmar war, DenmarkNorway got involved in another greater war, in which they fought together with the mainly north German and other Protestant states against the Catholic states led by German Catholic League. Christian IV sought to become the leader of the north German Lutheran states, however following the Battle of Lutter in 1626 Denmark met a crushing defeat. This led to most of the German Protestant states ceasing their support for Christian IV. After another defeat at the Battle of Wolgast and following the Treaty of Lbeck in 1629, which forbade Denmark from future intervening in German affairs, Denmark's participation in the war came to an end. = As Sweden was having great success during the Thirty Years' War, together with Denmark being a failure, Sweden saw an opportunity of a change of power in the region. DenmarkNorway had a threatening territory surrounding Sweden, and the Sound Dues were a continuing irritation for the Swedes. In 1643 the Swedish Privy Council determined Swedish territorial gain in an eventual war against DenmarkNorway to have good chances. Not long after this, Sweden invaded DenmarkNorway. Denmark was itself poorly prepared for the war, and Norway was reluctant to attack Sweden, which left the Swedes in a good position. The war ended as foreseen with Swedish victory, and with the Treaty of Brmsebro in 1645, DenmarkNorway had to cede some of their territories, including Norwegian territories Jemtland, Herjedalen and Idre & Serna as well as the Danish Baltic Sea islands of Gotland and sel. So, as the Thirty Years' War would see the rise of Sweden as a great power, it marked the start of decline with the Danish. The Dano-Swedish War (16571658), a part of the Second Northern War, was one of the most devastating wars for the Dano-Norwegian kingdom. After a huge loss in the war, DenmarkNorway were forced in the Treaty of Roskilde to give Sweden nearly half their territory. This included Norwegian province of Trndelag and Bhuslen, and all remaining Danish provinces on the Swedish mainland plus the island of Bornholm. However, two years later, in 1660, there was a follow-up treaty, the Treaty of Copenhagen, which gave Trndelag and Bornholm back to DenmarkNorway. In the aftermath of Sweden's definite secession from the Kalmar Union in 1521, civil war and Protestant Reformation followed in Denmark and Norway. When things had settled down, the Rigsraad (High Council) of Denmark became weakened, and finally abolished in 1660 when DenmarkNorway became an absolutist state and Denmark a hereditary monarchy, as Norway had been since the Middle Ages. These changes were confirmed in the Lex Regia signed on 14 November 1665, stipulating that all power lay in the hands of the king, who was only responsible towards God. The Norwegian Riksrd was assembled for the last time in 1537. Norway kept its separate laws and some institutions, such as a royal chancellor, and separate coinage and army. Denmark had lost its provinces in Scania after the Treaty of Roskilde and was always eager to retrieve them, but as Sweden had grown into a great power it would not be an easy task. However, Christian V finally saw an opportunity when Sweden got involved in the Franco-Dutch War, and after some hesitation Denmark invaded Sweden in 1675. Although the Danish assault initially was a great success, the Swedes led by 19-year-old Charles XI managed to counter-attack and take back the land that was being occupied. In the end the war was concluded with the French dictating peace, with no permanent gains or losses to either of the countries. During the French Revolutionary Wars DenmarkNorway at first tried to keep itself neutral, so it could continue its trade with both France and the United Kingdom, but when it entered the League of Armed Neutrality, the British considered it a hostile action, thus attacking Copenhagen in 1801 and again in 1807. In the 1807 attack on Copenhagen the British army confiscated the entire Dano-Norwegian navy on the grounds that DenmarkNorway was about to launch an attack on Britain, the Dano-Norwegian navy was the only navy left in Europe able to challenge the British navy after the destruction of the SpanishFrench navy in the battle of Trafalgar. The Dano-Norwegian navy was however not prepared for any military operation and the British soldiers found the Dano-Norwegian navy still in dock after the winter season. The Dano-Norwegians were more concerned about preserving their continued neutrality and the entire Dano-Norwegian army was therefore gathered at Danevirke in the event of a French attack, thereby leaving Copenhagen vulnerable to a British attack. The British attack on Danish neutrality effectively forced the Dano-Norwegians into an alliance with Napoleon and DenmarkNorway allied itself with France. DenmarkNorway was defeated and had to cede the territory of mainland Norway to the King of Sweden at the Treaty of Kiel. Norway's overseas possessions were kept by Denmark. But the Norwegians objected to the terms of this treaty, and a constitutional assembly declared Norwegian independence on 17 May 1814 and elected the Crown Prince Christian Frederik as king of independent Norway. Following a Swedish invasion, Norway was forced to accept a personal union between Sweden and Norway, but retained its liberal constitution and separate institutions, except for the foreign service. The union was dissolved in 1905. DenmarkNorway was amongst the countries to follow Martin Luther after the Protestant Reformation, thus the official religion was established as Lutheran Protestantism throughout the entire life span of the kingdom. There was however one other religious "reformation" in the kingdom during the rule of Christian VI, a follower of Pietism. The period from 1735 until his death in 1746 has been nicknamed "the State Pietism", as new laws and regulations were established in favor of Pietism. Though Pietism never did last for a substantial amount of recurring time, the next 200 years would see numerous new small pietistic resurrections. In the end, Pietism was never firmly established as a lasting religious grouping. 