Denmark participated in the Eurovision Song Contest 2015 with the song "The Way You Are", written by Remee S. Jackman and Chief 1. The song was performed by Anti Social Media, and was selected through the national final Dansk Melodi Grand Prix 2015, organised by the Danish broadcaster DR. Prior to the 2015 contest, Denmark had participated in the Eurovision Song Contest forty-three times since its first entry in 1957. Denmark has won the contest on three occasions: in 1963 with the song "Dansevise" performed by Grethe and Jrgen Ingmann, in 2000 with the song "Fly on the Wings of Love" performed by Olsen Brothers, and in 2013 with the song "Only Teardrops" performed by Emmelie de Forest. In 2014, Denmark hosted the Eurovision Song Contest at the B&W Hallerne in Copenhagen where their home entry, "Clich Love Song" performed by Basim, placed ninth. DR confirmed that Denmark would participate in the 2015 Eurovision Song Contest on 22 May 2014, at the same time announcing that the Danish entry would be selected through the national final Dansk Melodi Grand Prix 2015. Dansk Melodi Grand Prix 2015 was the 45th edition of Dansk Melodi Grand Prix, the music competition that selects Denmark's entries for the Eurovision Song Contest. The event was held on 7 February 2015 at the Gigantium in Aalborg, hosted by Esben Bjerre Hansen and Jacob Riising. The competition received a visual update for the 2015 edition including a new logo and slogan. The new logo, which replaced the three star logo that had been in use since 2009, has been described as a round organism from which sound waves emanate. The slogan for the 2015 edition of the competition was "Drmmen lever" (The Dream Lives). The format of the show featured one show consisting of ten songs where the winning song was selected by the combination of the viewers' SMS votes and votes cast by five regional juries. The public and the jury each had a total of 290 points to award. Each jury group awarded points as follows: 18, 10 and 12 points. The public vote were based on the percentage of votes each song has achieved. For example, if a song gained 10% of the public vote, then that entry would be awarded 10% of 290 points rounded to the nearest integer. The juries representing the five Danish regions were located at concurrent competition related events in the following locations: Pumpehuset (Copenhagen) in the Capital Region of Denmark, Gld nightclub (Nstved) in Zealand, Hotel Torvehallerne (Vejle) in the Region of Southern Denmark, Gbar club (Aarhus) in the Central Denmark Region and the Gigantium (Aalborg) in the North Denmark Region. Each regional jury was composed of three members and headed by a former Danish Eurovision Song Contest entrant. DR announced in July 2014 that they aimed to make changes to competition with the goal of producing "Dansk Melodi Grand Prix 2.0", which stressed quality over quantity. The entertainment director for DR, Jan Lagermand Lundme, stated that the competition would seek out more authentic and real songs that can connect with viewers, providing the Eurovision Song Contest 2014 winning Austrian entry "Rise Like a Phoenix" performed by Conchita Wurst and the second-placed 2014 Dutch entry "Calm After the Storm" performed by The Common Linnets, as examples of such songs that had a story to tell. DR opened a submission period between 4 July 2014 and 8 September 2014 for artists and composers to submit their entries, which received a total of 687 songs. A selection committee selected seven songs from the entries submitted to the broadcaster, while three participants (Sara Sukurani, Marcel & Soulman Group and World of Girls) were invited to compete based on editorial considerations. The artists and songs for Dansk Melodi Grand Prix 2015 were officially revealed by DR on 26 January 2015, however, the entries were leaked two days before the official presentation due to an early delivery of pre-ordered CDs. Following the official presentation, the songs were released in full-length on YouTube and the official album was made available on the largest Danish streaming services. The combination of regional jury votes and public SMS votes selected "The Way You Are" performed by Anti Social Media as the winner. = All countries except the "Big 5" (France, Germany, Italy, Spain and the United Kingdom), the host country and in this case Australia too, are required to qualify from one of two semi-finals in order to compete for the final; the top ten countries from each semi-final progress to the final. The European Broadcasting Union (EBU) split up the competing countries into five different pots based on voting patterns from previous contests, with countries with favourable voting histories put into the same pot. On 26 January 2015, an allocation draw was held which placed each country into one of the two semi-finals, as well as which half of the show they would perform in. Denmark was placed into the first semi-final, to be held on 19 May 2015, and was scheduled to perform in the second half of the show. In the first semifinal, the producers of the show decided that Denmark would perform 13th, following Russia and preceding Albania. Denmark did not come in the top ten and therefore did not qualify from the semi-final. This is the first time Denmark has failed to qualify for the final since 2007. The Danish votes in both the first semi-final and final were based on 50% jury voting and 50% televoting results. The following five members comprised the Danish jury: Sren Poppe Chairperson singer, songwriter, represented Denmark in the 2001 contest as part of Rollo & King Micky Skeel songwriter (jury member in Semi-Final 1) Jonas Schrder music producer, songwriter (jury member in Final) Anna David singer Lotte Feder singer Tamra Rosanes singer, songwriter 