In mathematics, in particular in functional analysis and nonlinear analysis, it is possible to define the derivative of a function between two Frchet spaces. This notion of differentiation is significantly weaker than the derivative in a Banach space. Nevertheless, it is the weakest notion of differentiation for which many of the familiar theorems from calculus hold. In particular, the chain rule is true. With some additional constraints on the Frchet spaces and functions involved, there is an analog of the inverse function theorem called the NashMoser inverse function theorem, having wide applications in nonlinear analysis and differential geometry. Formally, the definition of differentiation is identical to the Gteaux derivative. Specifically, let X and Y be Frchet spaces, U X be an open set, and F : U Y be a function. The directional derivative of F in the direction v X is defined by if the limit exists. One says that F is continuously differentiable, or C1 if the limit exists for all v X and the mapping DF:U x X Y is a continuous map. Higher order derivatives are defined inductively via A function is said to be Ck if DkF : U x X x Xx ... x X Y is continuous. It is C, or smooth if it is Ck for every k. Let X, Y, and Z be Frchet spaces. Suppose that U is an open subset of X, V is an open subset of Y, and F : U V, G : V Z are a pair of C1 functions. Then the following properties hold: (Fundamental theorem of calculus.) If the line segment from a to b lies entirely within U, then . (The chain rule.) D(G o F)(u)x = DG(F(u))DF(u)x for all u U and x X. (Linearity.) DF(u)x is linear in x. More generally, if F is Ck, then DF(u){x1,...,xk} is multilinear in the x's. (Taylor's theorem with remainder.) Suppose that the line segment between u U and u+h lies entirely within U. If F is Ck then where the remainder term is given by (Commutativity of directional derivatives.) If F is Ck, then for every permutation of {1,2,...,k}. The proofs of many of these properties rely fundamentally on the fact that it is possible to define the Riemann integral of continuous curves in a Frchet space. Surprisingly, a mapping between open subset of Frchet spaces is smooth (infinitely often differentiable) if it maps smooth curves to smooth curves; see Convenient analysis. Moreover, smooth curves in spaces of smooth functions are just smooth functions of one variable more. The existence of a chain rule allows for the definition of a manifold modeled on a Frchet space: a Frchet manifold. Furthermore, the linearity of the derivative implies that there is an analog of the tangent bundle for Frchet manifolds. Frequently the Frchet spaces that arise in practical applications of the derivative enjoy an additional property: they are tame. Roughly speaking, a tame Frchet space is one which is almost a Banach space. On tame spaces, it is possible to define a preferred class of mappings, known as tame maps. On the category of tame spaces under tame maps, the underlying topology is strong enough to support a fully fledged theory of differential topology. Within this context, many more techniques from calculus hold. In particular, there are versions of the inverse and implicit function theorems. 