This article is about DRAKON, a programming language. For other uses of Drakon see Drakon (disambiguation). DRAKON is an algorithmic visual programming language developed within the Buran space project. The development of DRAKON started in 1986 and was directed by Vladimir Parondzhanov with the participation of Russian Federal Space Agency (Academician Pilyugin Center, Moscow) and Russian Academy of Sciences (Keldysh Institute of Applied Mathematics). The language was constructed by formalization, ergonomization and nonclassical structurization of flowcharts described in the ISO 5807-85 standard and Russian standard 19.701-90 and for the development of real time programs. The goal was to replace specialised languages PROL2 (2) (assigned for developing onboard complex software for embedded computer system Biser-4 (-4) on board of Buran), DIPOL () (assigned for developing software for ground maintenance computer system of Buran) and LAKS () (assigned for modelling) used in the Buran project with one universal programming language. The work was finished in 1996 (3 years after the Buran project was officially closed), when an automated CASE programming system called "Grafit-Floks" was developed. This CASE is used since 1996 in many major space programs: an international project Sea Launch, Russian orbit insertion upper stage Fregat (Russian: , frigate), upgraded heavy launch vehicle (carrier rocket) Proton-M, etc. DRAKON rules for creating diagrams are cognitively optimized for easy comprehension, making it a tool for intelligence augmentation. DRAKON (Russian: is a backronym for , , which stands for "friendly Russian algorithmic language that provides clarity." DRAKON is not a single language but a family of hybrid languages, such as DRAKON-C, DRAKON-Java, etc. All hybrid languages of the drakon-family have the uniform graphical syntax and differ in textual one. The standard graphical syntax provides visual similarity of drakon-charts of different hybrid languages. Every hybrid language of the family has its own textual syntax. Strict distinction of the graphical and textual syntax along with rich graphics improves flexibility and variety of expressive means of the language. The unification of the rules of the graphical syntax in the hybrid languages secures their conceptual unity. The basis of the graphical syntax is a graphical alphabet. Graphical elements (graphical letters) of the DRAKON alphabet are called icons (not symbols). There are 27 icons in the DRAKON graphical alphabet. DRAKON has not only icons, but also macroicons. Macroicons are the graphical words of the DRAKON language. Just as words are made up of letters, macroions (graphical words) consist of the icons (graphical letters). There are 21 macroicons in the DRAKON language. Icons and macroions are the building blocks for constructing drakon-charts. The important parts of maroions are valence points (in the illustration to the right, they are depicted as little black circles). Into these points, icons or microicons can be successively entered and arranged by drakon-editor in neat, orderly vertical rows. 