EduLanka, also known as edulanka online education school or is a largest online education school of Sri Lanka. Sinhala Name is and Tamil name is . eduLanka is an online education service which provides education free of charge. The test site was built in 2006 and officially launched as edulanka services in May 2007. In 2010 a large update was done for edulanka, after which there was an increase in the number of registrations from local school students, university students, teachers, postgraduate students and others. with online education.Today edulanka is the largest and most popular education web site in Sri Lanka. Ordinary Level Mathematics, Advanced Level Science and Mathes, SLAS Exam Help and Government Job Information are the most popular areas among students. eduLanka online education concept was built as a small education web sub-domain of another small web site in 2006. Then officially launched edulanka services and eduLanka main web site in May 2007 with hundreds of education lessons. More than 90% of users accessed this service from Sri Lanka, therefore the global domain name was changed to eduLanka.lk (CCTLD) with a new web interface and new education functions. Then edulanka becomes most popular online education web site in Sri Lanka. Alexa rank - 100,645 as at 2012-09-12. After 2010 number of daily visitors increased to .7 million pages views per month. In 2011 Sinhala and Tamil IDN domain names attached to edulanka. Currently edulanka provides Multi-lingual education resources to the world specially for Sri Lanka. Site popularity can be measured from increase of Alexa traffic rank, Facebook social plug in status, number of user shares and Google Search traffic ranks. eduLanka provides G.C.E Advanced Level lessons, G.C.E. Ordinary Level lessons, Information Technology lessons, English education lessons,Local University Related lessons, Postgraduate Education Related resources, Research and Development lessons and another lessons for local education related community. In addition to providing lessons edlulanka provides latest Government Job alert and job information, Government examination help information and model papers, Examination Results and notification, Digital library Facilities, Teacher founding service, Tuition class information of Sri Lanka, Government School Information of Sri Lanka, CV Formats and CV samples, Past papers and online school Syllabus finding services. education lessons and information provided by professional teachers and education related parties. edulanka continuously provided all these services with Free of charge. December 2005 - Make the Free Testing Envirinment 6 June 2006 - Alawathugoda World Wide was Launched December 2006 online education Concept was Designed under Alawathugoda World Wide (2006 December) 15 May 2007 eduLanka.com web site was Launched (Main Site Start Screen) 20 December 2010 eduLanka.lk Web site Launched (Start eduLanka.lk) March 2011 eduLanka moved into new interface (eduLanka new Interface) April 2011 Sinhala IDN interface launched March 2012 Tamil IDN interface launched LK domain registry opens IDN name registration facility into Sri Lanka in 2010 and then edulanka launched first Sinhala and Tamil IDN domain names related to education in Sri Lanka. Sinhala IDN domain can be accessible in . URL and Tamil IDN domain accessible in . URL. eduLanka provides IDN domains in Sri Lanka. 