Endometrial ablation is a medical procedure that is used to remove (ablate) or destroy the endometrial lining of a uterus. This technique is most often employed for people who suffer from excessive or prolonged bleeding during their menstrual cycle but cannot or do not wish to undergo a hysterectomy. The procedure is most commonly done on an outpatient basis. Placenta accreta may occur if the patient becomes pregnant after endometrial ablation, so birth control is recommended. However, heavy menstrual bleeding is most commonly due to dysfunctional uterine bleeding or adenomyosis. If patient does not want hysterectomy or endometrial ablation, another option with norethisterone can be given. Approximately 80% of those who undergo this procedure will have reduced menstrual bleeding. Of those, approximately 45% will stop having periods altogether. However, a second procedure or a hysterectomy will be required in approximately 22% of cases. Although uncommon, the procedure can have serious complications including: Perforation of the uterus Burns to the uterus (beyond the endometrial lining) Pulmonary edema or embolism Bowel burn leading to death. See Maude database, Novasure. Post-ablation tubal sterilization syndrome A number of competing procedures are available. Transcervical resection of the endometrium (TCRE) uses a hysteroscope equipped with a cauterization loop that avails for resection of the endometrium. It is a proven procedure, being a day-care procedure with rapid recovery. The Hydrothermal Ablation System uses a small telescope-like device called a hysteroscope which is inserted into the uterus through the cervix, to help doctors safely confirm proper probe placement and to see the area they are treating. In this procedure, the doctor looks at the inside of the uterus with the hysteroscope and fills the uterus with saline fluid. The fluid is then slowly heated and the lining of the uterus is burned so that menstrual bleeding periods become less heavy and, in some cases, even stop. The fluid is then cooled and removed by special tubing to protect the external areas of the body from any burns. 94% of patients who have undergone this procedure reported a satisfactory decrease in menstrual flow. With the Novasure system a mesh is introduced into the cavity and the lining is destroyed by applying electrical energy to the mesh that will thermally damage the adjacent endometrium. 87% of patients have a successful reduction in bleeding down to normal levels. The Thermachoice III balloon is a technique in which heated fluid fills a balloon which was inserted into the uterine lining. The fluid is safely contained in a flexible and non-allergenic material that conforms to most uterine shapes and sizes with no reduction of efficacy. Older methods utilize hysteroscopy to insert instruments into the uterus to destroy the lining under vision using laser or electric current in a small loop. Another system introduces a radio-frequency rod that emits energy to destroy the uterine lining. The procedure is done while the patient is either under local anesthesia, or, if necessary, general or spinal anesthesia. The recovery period can be from one day up to 2 weeks. After the procedure, the endometrium heals by scarring, reducing or removing the possibility of future uterine bleeding. The patient may develop amenorrhea, however hormonal functioning will remain unaffected. 