Enterbrain (), formerly Enterbrain, Inc. (, Kabushiki Gaisha Entburein), is a Japanese publisher and brand company of Kadokawa Corporation established on April 1, 2000. Magazines published by Enterbrain are generally focused on video games and computer entertainment as well as video game and strategy guides. In addition, the company publishes a small selection of anime artbooks. Enterbrain is based in Tokyo, Japan, with a paid-in capital of 410 million yen. Enterbrain's current president is Hirokazu Hamamura. B's LOG: Magazine focused on female gamers. Weekly Famitsu: Up to the minute video game and video game industry news and reviews. Famitsu PS2: Biweekly magazine focused on the Sony PlayStation 2 hardware and software. Famitsu Xbox: Monthly magazine focused on Microsoft Xbox hardware and software. Famitsu DS + Cube & Advance: Monthly magazine focused on Nintendo DS, Nintendo GameCube and Game Boy Advance hardware and software. TECH Win DVD: A magazine aimed specifically to PC users. It comes with two CD-ROMs worth of goodies and information. Tech Gian: A CD-ROM magazine focused on adult video games. MAGI-CU: A visual entertainment magazine based on female game characters. Comic Beam: Comic Beam was formerly known as ASCII Comic. It is a comic magazine filled with original manga. Harta (formerly Fellows! ): A periodical comic magazine consisting of original manga stories. Arcadia: Monthly magazine focused on arcade machines. Arcadia also has game hints and advice for the latest arcade games as well as high score reports from Japanese arcades. Arcadia was started by former staff of the GAMEST(ja:) magazine. Sarabure: A horse racing magazine. Famitsu Connect!On: Magazine focused on online video games. Logout Tabletalk RPG Series: Tabletop role-playing games. RPG Maker: a role-playing game creation tool Fighter Maker: a fighting games creation tool Sim RPG Maker: a tactical RPG games creation tool Shooter Maker (ja:): a shoot-'em-up games creation tool IG Maker: creates platformer, adventure, and shoot-'em-up games. Also supports creation of games for the Xbox 360 console. Alshard Alshard GAIA Blade of Arcana Inou Tsukai Night Wizard! Star Legend Tenra War Terra the Gunslinger Tokyo NOVA Panzer Front (1999) KimiKiss (2006) Amagami (2009) Earth Seeker (2011) Photo Kano (2012) 