The Committee on Culture and Education (CULT) is a committee of the European Parliament. This committee has focused on the well-being of all members of the human race and the increased opportunities for education in all countries of the European Union. The Committee has 6 aspects of focus. looking at the cultural aspects of the European Union, in particular the safeguarding of cultural heritage, cultural exchange, and artistic creation of the nations in the European Union. looking at the Union's education policy, Both in the school education systems, and in lifelong-learning programmes, such as museums and libraries. developing an audiovisual policy and connecting this with educational information systems. looking at the development of a sports and leisure policy with an additional youth policy. looking to connect information with a media policy. cooperation with third countries in the areas of culture and education and relations with the relevant international organisations and institutions. In this current term, the Committee on Culture and Education has looked at three issues. The first issue is the protection of members of circuses in the European Union. The Committee has declared these members of society as a recognized culture in the EU and desires the circus vocational schools to become accredited among other provisions. This resolution passed on July 12, 2005 with a vote of 29 in favor, 1 against, and 2 abstained. The second dealt with the standardization of higher education systems through thorough internal assessments in accordance with the European Higher Education Area. Education also must promote diversity in its students and in the programs offered by the various institutions. It was adopted on August 30, 2005 with a vote of 24 in favor, 1 against, and 1 abstained. The third issue has regarded the protection of minors. The committee has brought forth a resolution for the protection of minors in all areas of media, including magazines, newspapers, and the Internet. Among numerous other provisions, it will offer classes in safe usage of the Internet, and put forth harsher punishments for Internet criminal activities. This committee, however, does not desire to diminish freedom of speech. This resolution was adopted on September 22, 2005 with a vote of 21 in favor and 1 against. The Parliament has made a point of trying to promote culture. It has hosted numerous cultural events, 150 took place in 2005, including art and concerts. Some exhibitions have been on the topics of breast cancer, the Srebrenica massacre and the Orange revolution. As of 2007, is also gives the Lux Prize for European Cinema. The CULT is made up of 61 members The major political groups are also represented on this committee including, the Party of European Socialists, the European People's Party, the European Conservatives and Reformists Group, the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe, the European United Left - Nordic Green Left, the The GreensEuropean Free Alliance, and the Europe of Freedom and Direct Democracy Group. There are also three members that are not attached to any particular party. List of members for the 8th legislature Silvia Costa Andrea Bocskor Mircea Diaconu Helga Trpel Michaela ojrov 