The fecaloral route (or alternatively the oralfecal route or orofecal route) is a route of transmission of a disease, when pathogens in fecal particles passing from one host are introduced into the oral cavity of another host. One main cause of fecal-oral disease transmission in developing countries is lack of adequate sanitation. The process of transmission may be simple or involve multiple steps. Some examples of routes of fecal-oral transmission include: water that has come in contact with feces (for example due to groundwater pollution from pit latrines) and is then not treated properly before drinking; food that has been prepared in the presence of fecal matter; disease vectors, like houseflies, spreading contamination from inadequate fecal disposal such as open defecation; poor or absent hand washing after using the toilet or handling feces (such as changing diapers) poor or absent cleaning of anything that has been in contact with feces; sexual practices that may involve oral contact with feces, such as anilingus, coprophilia or "ass to mouth". The "F-diagram" was first proposed in a publication by Hesperian Foundation for the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) in 2005 and has been widely used in many other sanitation publications since then. It was set up in a way that fecal-oral transmission pathways are shown to take place via nouns that start with the letter F: fingers, flies, fields, foods, and fluids (fluids stands here for polluted water - be it polluted drinking water, surface water or groundwater). The F-diagram is also used to show how proper sanitation (in particular toilets, hygiene, handwashing) can act as effective barriers to stop transmission of diseases via fecal-oral pathways. One approach to changing people's behaviors and stopping open defecation, the community-led total sanitation approach, uses "live demonstrations" of flies moving from food to fresh human feces and back to "trigger" villagers into action. Some of the diseases that can be passed via the fecal-oral route are: Ascariasis and other soil transmitted helminthiasis Cholera Clostridium difficile Cryptosporidiosis Enteroviruses Giardiasis Hepatitis A Hepatitis E Norovirus acute gastroenteritis Poliomyelitis Rotavirus Most of these pathogens cause gastroenteritis. Shigellosis (bacillary dysentery) Typhoid fever Vibrio parahaemolyticus infections Waterborne diseases Transmission of Helicobacter pylori by oral-fecal route has been demonstrated in murine models. Entameba histolytica Escherichia coli tape worms 