The FIFA U-17 World Cup, founded as the FIFA U-16 World Championship, later changed to the FIFA U-17 World Championship and known by its current name since 2007, is the world championship of association football for male players under the age of 17 organized by Fdration Internationale de Football Association (FIFA). The first edition was staged in 1985 in China, and tournaments have been played every two years since then. It began as a competition for players under the age of 16 with the age limit raised to 17 from the 1991 edition onwards. The most recent tournament was hosted by the UAE and won by Nigeria, with the next edition being hosted by Chile in 2015, followed by India who will host the tournament in 2017 Nigeria is the most successful nation in the tournament's history, with four titles and three runners up. Brazil is the second most successful with three titles and two runners up. Ghana and Mexico have won the tournament twice. A corresponding tournament for female players, the FIFA U-17 Women's World Cup, began in 2008, with North Korea winning the inaugural tournament. Each tournament consists of a group phase, in which four teams play against one another and standings in the group table decide which teams advance, followed by a knockout phase of successive matches where the winning team advances through the competition and the losing team is eliminated. This continues until two teams remain to contest the final, which decides the tournament winner. The losing semi-finalists also contest a match to decide third place. From 1985 to 2005 there were 16 teams in the competition, divided into four groups of four teams each in the group phase. Each team played the others in its group and the group winner and runner up qualified for the knockout phase. From 2007 the tournament was expanded to 24 teams, divided into six groups of four teams each. The top 2 places in each group plus the four best third-placed teams advanced to the knockout phase. Competition matches are played in two 45-minute halves (i.e. 90 minutes in total). In the knockout phase, until the 2011 tournament, if tied at the end of 90 minutes an additional 30 minutes of extra time were played, followed by a penalty shoot-out if still tied. Starting with the 2011 tournament, the extra time period was eliminated to avoid player burnout, and all knockout games progress straight to penalties if tied at the end of 90 minutes. The host nation of each tournament qualifies automatically. The remaining teams qualify through competitions organised by the six regional confederations. For the first edition of the tournament in 1985, all of the teams from Europe plus Bolivia appeared by invitation of FIFA. = = = Key: aet - after extra time PSO- match won on penalty shootout Africa is the most successful continental zone with 6 tournament wins (4 for Nigeria, 2 for Ghana) and 5 times as runner up. Notably the 1993 final was contested by two African teams, the only occasion when the final has been contested by two teams from the same confederation. South America has 3 tournament wins and has been runner up three times. Additionally Argentina has finished in third place on 3 occasions, Chile has done so on one occasion and Colombia has finished in fourth place twice, but neither of the latter two have ever appeared in the final. Europe has 3 tournaments wins (1 each for France, USSR and Switzerland) and has been runner up 5 times. Spain has been runner up on 3 occasions. Additionally Portugal and Netherlands have won third-place medals in 1989 and 2005 respectively. The CONCACAF zone has 2 tournament wins (for Mexico in 2005 and 2011), this confederation has reached the final three times(with Mexico). Asia has 1 tournament win (for Saudi Arabia in 1989), the only time that a team from this confederation has reached the final and the only time an Asian team won a FIFA tournament in male category. (Australia was runner up in 1999 but at that time was in the Oceania Football Confederation). Oceania has no tournament wins and 1 occasion as runner up (for Australia in 1999). Australia has since moved to the Asian confederation. This tournament is peculiar in that the majority of titles have gone to teams from outside the strongest regional confederations (CONMEBOL and UEFA). Of the fifteen editions held so far, nine (60 percent of the total) have been won by teams from North and Central America, Africa and Asia. At every tournament three awards are presented: The Golden Shoe is awarded to the top goalscorer of tournament. The Golden Ball is awarded to the most valuable player of the tournament. The Fair Play Award is presented to the team with the best disciplinary record in the tournament. The United States appeared in all first 14 editions of the competition (19852011) until missing out in 2013, Brazil has appeared 14 times too while Argentina and Australia 11 times. Nigeria have won the tournament 4 times followed by Brazil with 3 tournament wins. Nigeria have appeared in the final on 7 occasions while Brazil have made 5 final appearances. Mexico is the first and only host team that won on home soil (2011). France's Florent Sinama Pongolle in the 2001 edition and Souleymane Coulibaly from Cte d'Ivoire in the 2011 edition hold the record for the most goals scored by a player in a single tournament, scoring 9 goals. Nigeria holds the record for most goals scored by a team in a single tournament with 26 goals in the 2013 tournament hosted by United Arab Emirates. They are closely followed by Germany with a total of 24 goals in the 2011 tournament hosted by Mexico. Canada's Quillan Roberts holds the record as the only goalkeeper to score a goal at the tournament, and in any FIFA 11-a-side tournament, scoring the equalizer in the 87th minute against England on June 22, 2011. 