Fukuoka Prefecture (, Fukuoka-ken) is a prefecture of Japan located on Kysh Island. The capital is the city of Fukuoka. Fukuoka Prefecture includes the former provinces of Chikugo, Chikuzen, and Buzen. Kra taisha, Sumiyoshi-jinja, Hakosagi-g and Usa jinj are the chief Shinto shrines (ichinomiya) in the prefecture. Fukuoka Prefecture faces the sea on three sides, bordering on Saga, ita, and Kumamoto prefectures and facing Yamaguchi Prefecture across the Kanmon Straits. As of 1 April 2012, 18% of the total land area of the prefecture was designated as Natural Parks, namely Setonaikai National Park, Genkai, Kitakysh, and Yaba-Hita-Hikosan Quasi-National Parks, and Chikugogawa, Chikuh, Dazaifu, Sefuri Raizan, and Yabegawa Prefectural Natural Parks. Fukuoka includes the two largest cities on Kysh, Fukuoka and Kitakyushu, and much of Kysh's industry. It also includes a number of small islands near the north coast of Kysh. Twenty-eight cities are located in Fukuoka Prefecture: These are the towns and villages in each district: Fukuoka prefecture's main cities form one of Japan's main industrial centers, accounting for nearly 40% of the economy of Kysh. Major industries include automobiles, semiconductors, and steel. Fukuoka prefecture is noteworthy as the place where tire manufacturer Bridgestone[1] and consumer electronics chain Best Denki were founded. According to the latest Japanese population estimates (1 June 2013), population in Fukuoka Prefecture reached 5,088,483 inhabitants, making the prefecture the 9th most populated of Japan's 47 prefectures. Fukuoka Art Museum In Ohori Park; contains a wide selection of contemporary and other art from around the world. Fukuoka Asian Art Museum contains art from various countries of Asia. Fukuoka City Museum displays a broad range of items from the region's history, including a spectacular gold seal. Genko Historical Museum (; Museum of the Mongol Invasion) in Higashi Koen (East Park) displays Japanese and Mongolian arms and armor from the 13th century as well as paintings on historical subjects. Open on weekends. Hakata Machiya Folk Museum Dedicated to displaying the traditional ways of life, speech, and culture of the Fukuoka region. Fukuoka Masjid Al Nour Islamic Culture Center, Dedicated to share Islamic subjects and culture. HKT48 Theater, local theater where the Idol group HKT48 performs every day. Hakata Dontaku Harbour Festival, Tenjin, Fukuoka on May 3 and 4 Hakata Gion Yamagasa, Kushida Shrine, Fukuoka on July Kokura Gion Yamagasa, Kitakyushu on July Tobata Gion Yamagasa, Kitakyushu on July Kurosaki Gion Yamagasa, Kitakyushu on July Kitahara Hakushu Festival, Yanagawa on November 1 to 3 The sports teams listed below are based in Fukuoka. Football (soccer) Avispa Fukuoka (Fukuoka City) Giravanz Kitakyushu (Kitakysh City) Baseball Fukuoka SoftBank Hawks (Fukuoka City) Basketball Fukuoka Rizing (Fukuoka City) Rugby Coca Cola West Red Sparks (Fukuoka City) Fukuoka Sanix Blues (Munakata) Kyuden Voltex Sanix World Rugby Youth Tournament The prefecture has two significant annual athletics events: the Fukuoka International Cross Country and the Fukuoka International Open Marathon Championship. The marathon race has been held in Fukuoka since 1959 and has seen a number of world records broken during its history. Fukuoka Prefecture has the largest number of designated yakuza groups among all of the prefectures, at 5; the Kudo-kai, the Taishu-kai, the Fukuhaku-kai, the Dojin-kai and the Kyushu Seido-kai. Between 2004 and 2009, and in early 2011, Fukuoka Prefecture leads the nation in gun-related incidents. These incidents were mostly related to the local yakuza syndicates, specifically the Kudo-kai, the Dojin-kai and the Kyushu Seido-kai. Fukuoka Prefecture has had the highest frequency of youth crime among all of the prefectures of Japan since 2003. Kokura prefectural office New Kitakyushu airport The most popular place for tourism is Fukuoka City, especially at the time of the Dontaku festival, and Dazaifu, although Kitakysh has also tried to attract tourists. Train West Japan Railway Company(=JR Nishinihon) Sany Shinkansen Hakata Minami Line JR Kyushu Kysh Shinkansen, Kagoshima Main Line, Chikuh Main Line, Nipp Main Line, Kyudai Main Line Chikuhi Line, Gotji Line, Kashii Line, Hitahikosan Line, Sasaguri Line Nishi-Nippon Railroad Tenjin muta Line, Dazaifu Line, Nishitetsu Amagi Line, Kaizuka Line Amagi Railway Amagi Railway Amagi Line Heisei Chikuh Railway Ita Line, Itota Line, Tagawa Line Fukuoka City Subway Kk Line, Hakozaki Line, Nanakuma Line Kitakyushu Monorail Hawaii, United States Jiangsu Province, People's Republic of China Delhi, India Bangkok, Thailand Hanoi, Vietnam 