Utah is republic and the government of Utah holds powers divided into three distinct branches: legislative; executive; and, judicial. Each branch fulfills specific functions and responsibilities under the Utah Constitution. The executive powers of government are vested in the Governor. The current governor is Gary Herbert, a Republican. Herbert, the previous lieutenant governor, assumed the governorship on August 11, 2009, following the resignation of Governor Jon Huntsman, Jr., who was appointed United States Ambassador to the People's Republic of China by President Barack Obama. Herbert was elected for a further four-year term in 2012. Officers The Governor's Cabinet consists of the following appointees, who are the heads of the agencies listed: Executive Director, Utah Administrative Services Commissioner, Utah Department of Agriculture and Food Executive Director, Utah Department of Corrections Chief Information Officer for the State of Utah, Utah Department of Technology Services Executive Director, Utah Department of Commerce Executive Director, Utah Department of Environmental Quality Commissioner, Utah Department of Financial Institutions Executive Director, Utah Governor's Office of Economic Development Executive Director, Utah Department of Health Executive Director, Utah Department of Human Resource Management Executive Director, Utah Department of Human Services Commissioner, Utah Insurance Department Adjutant General of Utah, Utah National Guard Executive Director, Utah Department of Natural Resources Commissioner, Utah Department of Public Safety Executive Director, Utah Department of Transportation Executive Director, Utah Department of Community and Culture Executive Director, Utah Department of Workforce Services Executive Director, Utah Department of Veteran Affairs Chairperson, Utah Board of Pardons and Parole Commissioner, Utah Labor Commission Commissioner, Utah State Tax Commission The legislative powers of government are vested in the Senate, House of Representatives and the people. The House of Representatives has a Republican majority. Leadership President - Wayne L. Niederhauser (R-9) Majority (Republican) Leadership Majority Leader: Ralph Okerlund (R-24) Majority Whip: J. Stuart Adams (R-22) Minority (Democratic) Leadership Minority Leader: Gene Davis (D-3) Minority Whip: Karen Mayne (D-5) Leadership Speaker of the House: Rebecca D. Lockhart (R-64) Majority (Republican) Leadership Majority Leader: Brad L. Dee (R-11) Majority Whip: Gregory H. Hughes (R-51) Minority (Democratic) Leadership Minority Leader: Jennifer M. Seelig (D-23) Minority Whip: Tim M. Cosgrove (D-44) The judicial powers of government are vested in a Supreme Court, district courts, and other courts of record. 