Graptemys is a genus of aquatic, freshwater turtles known commonly as map turtles or sometimes sawback turtles, endemic to North America. They are found throughout the eastern half of the United States and northward into southern Canada. They superficially resemble many other species of aquatic turtles, including sliders (Trachemys) and cooters (Pseudemys). However, they are distinguished by a keel that runs the length of the center of the carapace. They also typically grow to a smaller size at maturity. They are given the common name "map turtle" due to the map-like markings on the carapace. Adult Graptemys males have greatly elongated claws on the front feet, which are used in courtship behavior. The male faces the considerably larger female and "fans" her face, vibrating his foreclaws against her head to induce her to cooperate in mating. Average life expectancy of map turtles ranges from 15 to 100 years, depending on species. Throughout the pet trade, Mississippi, common, and Ouachita map turtles were bred and hatched out by the thousands in the 1970s. Various other turtles were available, but as the salmonellosis Four-inch Law was established, map turtles and others slowly decreased in popularity. Today, these same three still hold the title for most common among the pet trade. Other species being captive-bred more often include the Texas map turtle, Cagle's map turtle, and the black-knobbed map turtle. Some harder-to-find map turtles include the yellow-blotched map turtle and the Pearl River map turtle. (Listed alphabetically) Graptemys barbouri Carr & Marchland, 1942 Barbour's map turtle Graptemys caglei Haynes & McKown, 1974 Cagle's map turtle Graptemys ernsti Lovich & McCoy, 1992 Escambia map turtle Graptemys flavimaculata Cagle, 1954 yellow-blotched map turtle or yellow-blotched sawback Graptemys geographica ( Le Sueur, 1817) northern map turtle, formerly known as the common map turtle Graptemys gibbonsi Lovich & McCoy, 1992 Pascagoula map turtle Graptemys nigrinoda Cagle, 1954 black-knobbed map turtle Graptemys oculifera (Baur, 1890) ringed map turtle Graptemys ouachitensis Cagle, 1953 Ouachita map turtle Graptemys pearlensis Ennen, Lovich, Kreiser, Selman, Qualls, 2010 Pearl River map turtle Graptemys pseudogeographica (Gray, 1831) false map turtle G. p. kohnii (Baur, 1890) Mississippi map turtle G. p. pseudogeographica Gray, 1831 false map turtle Graptemys pulchra Baur, 1893 Alabama map turtle Graptemys versa Stejneger, 1925 Texas map turtle 