Hakor or Hagar, also called with the hellenized forms Achoris or Hakoris, was an ancient Egyptian pharaoh of the 29th Dynasty. His reign marks the apex of this feeble and short-lived dynasty, having ruled for 13 years more than half of its entire duration. Hakor's accession and relationships with his predecessor Nepherites I were long debated. After Nepherites' death a dynastic struggle did seem to have occurred, and the throne was claimed by two or maybe three pretenders: Hakor, Psammuthes, and possibly a phantom figure called Muthis who was only mentioned in Eusebius' Epithome of Manetho. As a result, Hakor was alternately considered Nepherites' legitimate successor or an unrelated usurper. In 1986 John D. Ray suggested that Hakor was Nepherites' heir, who ruled undisturbed until his Year 2 when he was deposed by Psammuthes. After another year, Hakor managed to retake his legitimate throne by overthrowing the usurper, and continued to date his reign since his first coronation date, simply pretending that this gap never occurred. The third pretender, Muthis, could be inserted within this struggle, but his role assuming that he really did exist is unknown. Ray's hypothesis is accepted by other Egyptologists such as Alan B. Lloyd and Toby Wilkinson. Shortly after his death, Hakor was called an usurper by the founder of the subsequent dynasty, Nectanebo I. However, it has been suggested that Achoris and Nectanebo might have been relatives in some way, possibly both related to Nepherites I but rivals to each other. Once re-established, Hakor made considerable exertions to affirm his legitimacy, putting emphasis on his (real or fictional) descent from Nepherites. His building activity was remarkable and he also extensively restored many monuments of his royal predecessors. In Karnak, Hakor finished the chapel for the sacred barque of Amun-Ra near the first pylon which was started by Psammuthes or possibly by Nepherites I; he also possibly began a temple complex in northern Saqqara which was later further developed under Nectanebo II. His building activity is well attested in others various places of Upper Egypt (Luxor, Medinet Habu, El-Kab, El-Tod, Medamud, Elephantine), in the Temple of Hibis of Kharga Oasis, as well as other locations in Middle Egypt. Hakor apparently reprised Nepherites' foreign policy. In 388 BCE Aristophanes' comedy Plutus was performed which mentioned an alliance between the Athenians and the Egyptians, though more likely it was intended to refer to the Athenian support for the rebellion of Evagoras I of Cyprus himself allied with Hakor - against the Achaemenids. Theopompus also reported an alliance between Hakor and the Pisidians. The peace of Antalcidas between Persians and Greeks (387 BCE) was a turning point: after that, Egypt and Cyprus remained the only opponents of Artaxerxes II as reported by Theopompus and Orosius. The following years are quite obscure, but it seems that the Persians first attacked Egypt in 385 BCE and, after three years of war, Egyptians managed to defeat the invaders. In 381 BCE Hakor sent aid, money and 50 triremes (apparently without crew, though) to Evagoras in order to contribute to his resistance against the Great King who, after the unsuccessful campaign of Egypt, was now focusing against Cyprus. But when in 380 BCE Evagoras himself came to Egypt to beg other aid, Hakor saw no need to continue supporting him and sent him back to Cyprus just with some more money. Evagoras surrendered to Artaxerxes soon after, but Hakor promptly joined a short-lived alliance with Sparta and Glos, son of the Egyptian admiral Tamos, himself a supporter of the pretender Cyrus the Younger against Artaxerxes II. Hakor managed to get the Athenian general Chabrias into his service, but the Persian general Pharnabazus II lobbied on Athens in order to repatriate him. Hakor died in 379/8 BCE, leaving his throne to his son Nepherites II. However, the latter was able to keep it for just four months before being overthrown and replaced by an army general from Sebennytos, Nectanebo I. 