In numerical analysis, Halleys method is a root-finding algorithm used for functions of one real variable with a continuous second derivative, i.e., C2 functions. It is named after its inventor Edmond Halley. The algorithm is second in the class of Householder's methods, right after Newton's method. Like the latter, it produces iteratively a sequence of approximations to the root; their rate of convergence to the root is cubic. Multidimensional versions of this method exist. Halley's method can be viewed as exactly finding the roots of a linear-over-linear Pad approximation to the function, in contrast to Newton's method/Secant method (approximates/interpolates the function linearly) or Cauchy's method/Muller's method (approximates/interpolates the function quadratically). Halleys method is a numerical algorithm for solving the nonlinear equation f(x) = 0. In this case, the function f has to be a function of one real variable. The method consists of a sequence of iterations: beginning with an initial guess x0. If f is a three times continuously differentiable function and a is a zero of f but not of its derivative, then, in a neighborhood of a, the iterates xn satisfy: This means that the iterates converge to the zero if the initial guess is sufficiently close, and that the convergence is cubic. The following alternative formulation shows the similarity between Halleys method and Newtons method. The expression is computed only once, and it is particularly useful when can be simplified. A further alternative is as below, in which case the technique is sometimes referred to as Haileys method. Using any variation, when the second derivative is very close to zero, the iteration is almost the same as under Newtons method. Consider the function Any root of f which is not a root of its derivative is a root of g; and any root of g is a root of f. Applying Newton's method to g gives with and the result follows. Notice that if f(c) = 0, then one cannot apply this at c because g(c) would be undefined. Suppose a is a root of f but not of its derivative. And suppose that the third derivative of f exists and is continuous in a neighborhood of a and xn is in that neighborhood. Then Taylor's theorem implies: and also where and are numbers lying between a and xn. Multiply the first equation by and subtract from it the second equation times to give: Canceling and re-organizing terms yields: Put the second term on the left side and divide through by to get: Thus: The limit of the coefficient on the right side as xn a is: If we take K to be a little larger than the absolute value of this, we can take absolute values of both sides of the formula and replace the absolute value of coefficient by its upper bound near a to get: which is what was to be proved. To summarize, 