Hatch End High School is an 11 - 19 co-educational academy school in Harrow, North London. It was originally named Blackwell School. This is now a dual specialist Arts and Applied Learning High School. It forms part of the highly successful Harrow collegiate Sixth Form. There are 1500 students across years 7 to 11 with twelve tutor groups of 25 pupils in each year group at Hatch End High School. In addition, there are over 250 students in the Sixth Form. 1948/49 - Blackwell School opened. 1950 - The Main School Building (originally built for 900 pupils) Architect: Cecil Stillman, Middlesex County Council. Builders: W. S. Try Ltd. High Street, Cowley. Consultant Engineers: F. J. Samuely BSc (Eng) 1953 - The Great Hall, was completed on site. Architects: John and Elizabeth Eastwick-Field. Builders: The Anglo-Scottish Construction Company Ltd.. Consultant Engineers: F. J. Samuely and Partners Ltd 1974 (September) - Comprehensive Education was introduced in Harrow. Blackwell was reborn as Hatch End High School. 1995 - Hatch End's grounds were used to film The Demon Headmaster. 2004 - Round House (drama centre) opened. 2006 - Hatch End Sixth Form opened. 2010 - Hatch End Sixth Form opened a new modern building, opened by Garath Thomas (local MP). Architects: Aedas Architects 2011 - Hatch End High school gained Academy Status 2013 - M.U.G.A opens (floodlit AstroTurf). 2014 - Hatch End Radio room opens, allows students to host a radio station during 35 minute breaks. The show originally won a world record by teachers Chris Firth and Richard Parker. 12 Science Laboratories 11 fully equipped networked computer rooms with Internet / wireless throughout. 4 Art Studios (including specialist ceramics, photography and ICT facilities) 3 Food Technology Rooms 1 Textiles Room 4 Design & Technology Workshops Careers Room Library and Learning Resources Centre (with Internet links) Great Hall, with excellent stage facilities and seating for 600 Fully equipped Performing Arts theatre Dedicated rooms for Music, including music technology, Dance and Drama Girls and Boys Gymnasia Tennis/ Netball/ Basketball Courts Playing and Practice Fields In addition the school uses the Roger Bannister Sports Centre School Minibus Philip Glenister (Actor) Robert Glenister (Actor) Mikey Bharj (Comedian) Melissa Suffield (Actress) Gareth Thomas (English politician) Loick Essien (Singer) Kristian Leontiou (Singer) Paul Rose (Screenwriter and journalist) Clive Ricks - Deputy Head of Hatch End High (English Cricketer) Robert Graeme Galbraith - Art Teacher (Artist & Poet) Mary James - Teacher 