Hindustan Unilever Limited (HUL) is an Indian consumer goods company based in Mumbai, Maharashtra. It is owned by Anglo-Dutch company Unilever which owns a 67% controlling share in HUL as of March 2015 and is the holding company of HUL. HUL's products include foods, beverages, cleaning agents, personal care products and water purifiers. HUL was established in 1933 as Lever Brothers and, in 1956, became known as Hindustan Lever Limited, as a result of a merger between Lever Brothers, Hindustan Vanaspati Mfg. Co. Ltd. and United Traders Ltd. It is headquartered in Mumbai, India and employs over 18,000 workers, whilst also indirectly helping to facilitate the employment of over 65,000 people. The company was renamed in June 2007 as "Hindustan Unilever Limited" Hindustan Unilever's distribution covers over 2 million retail outlets across India directly and its products are available in over 6.4 million outlets in the country. As per Nielsen market research data, two out of three Indians use HUL products. HUL is the market leader in Indian consumer products with presence in over 20 consumer categories such as soaps, tea, detergents and shampoos amongst others with over 700 million Indian consumers using its products. Sixteen of HUL's brands featured in the ACNielsen Brand Equity list of 100 Most Trusted Brands Annual Survey (2014), carried out by Brand Equity, a supplement of The Economic Times. The "most trusted brands" from HUL in the top 100 list (their rankings in brackets) are: Lux (6), Surf Excel (7), Clinic Plus (8), Rin (13), Lifebuoy (15), Close up (21), Pond's (22), Pepsodent (24), Fair & Lovely (29), Dove (30), Sunsilk (34), Vim (48), Wheel (67), Vaseline (70),Pears (78), Lakme (91). The latest launches for Hindustan Unilever include: Knorr Chinese Noodles, Schezwan and Hot & Spicy, Lakme Absolute Sculpt Range, Lakme Lip Love, Magnum Choco Cappuccino and Axe Gold Temptation. Its brands include: Food brands: Homecare Brands Personal Care Brands: Water Purifier Brand: Pureit Water Purifier HUL has produced many business leaders for corporate India, including Harish Manwani, the non-executive chairman of HUL and the former chief operating officer of Unilever. He was also a member of Unilever Leadership Executive team (ULE), which comprises the company's top management and is responsible for managing Unilever's profit and loss, and delivering growth across its regions, categories and functions. Sanjiv Mehta was appointed as the Managing Director and Chief Executive Officer of HUL with effect from 10 October 2013. He has also been appointed as Executive vice-president, South Asia, Unilever and is also the executive head of the South Asia cluster for Unilever. Hindustan Unilever Limited earned the highest recognition of Leadership in HR Excellence across industries at the 5th Confederation of Indian Industry (CII) National HR Excellence Awards 2014. With a ranking of three in the 2014 Global Aon Hewitt Top Companies for Leaders survey, HUL was the highest ranked Indian company to feature on the list. HUL was ranked 4th in the Hewitt Global Leadership Survey 2007 with only GE, P&G and Nokia ranking ahead of HUL in the ability to produce leaders. A study conducted by Aon Hewitt, The RBL Group and Fortune in 2011, ranked the company number six in the list of 'Top Companies for Leaders 2011 Study Results'. The company was awarded the CII- Prize for Leadership in HR Excellence at the 2nd CII National HR Conclave 2011 held on October 2011. The Institute of Competitiveness, India, has recognized Hindustan Unilever Limiteds Project Shakti for Creating Shared Value and bestowed upon the company the Porter Prize for 2014. HUL was the 1 highest ranked Indian company on the Forbes list of Most Innovative Companies across the globe for 2014 Was ranked number three on Fortune Indias list of Indias most admired companies. In the list compiled with the help of global management consultancy Hay Group. HUL was recognized as top FMCG company in India by Dun & Bradstreet Corporate Awards 2014. HUL is Client of the Year at Effies 2013 2014. Hindustan Unilever Limited was recognised as the 'Conscious Capitalist of the Year' at the 2013 Forbes India Leadership Awards. HUL won 12 awards overall with 4 Golds, 4 Silvers and 4 Bronzes at the 2013 Emvies Awards. HUL ranks number two on the on Fortune India's 2013 '50 Most Admired Companies list'. Hindustan Unilever Limited has emerged as the No. 4 'Most Respected Company in India' in a survey conducted by Business World in 2013. As per the latest Nielsen Campus Track-business school survey released in March 2015, Hindustan Unilever has emerged as the No.1 employer of choice for B-school students who will graduate in 2013, across functions. HUL also retained the 'Dream Employer' status for the 6th year running and continues to be the top company considered for application by B-School student in India. In 2012, HUL was recognised as one of the world's most innovative companies by Forbes. With a ranking of number 6, it was the highest ranked FMCG company. Hindustan Unilever Limited (HUL) won the first prize at FICCI Water Awards 2012 under the category of 'community initiatives by industry' for Gundar Basin Project, a water conservation initiative. Hindustan Unilever Limited won 13 awards at the Emvies 2012 Media Awards organised by the Advertising Club Bombay in September 2012. The company received four awards at the Spikes Asia Awards 2012, held in September. The awards included one Grand Prix one Gold Award and two Silver Awards. HUL's Chhindwara Unit won the National Safety Award for outstanding performance in Industrial Safety. These awards were instituted by the Union Ministry of Labour and Employment in 1965. HUL was one of the eight Indian companies to be featured on the Forbes list of World's Most Reputed companies in 2007. In July 2012 Hindustan Unilever Limited won the Golden Peacock Occupational Health and Safety Award for 2012 in the FMCG category for its safety and health initiatives and continuous improvement on key metrics. Pond's Talcum Powder's packaging innovation has secured a Silver Award at the prestigious 24th DuPont Global Packaging Award, in May 2012.The brand was recognised for cost and waste reduction. In May 2012, HUL & Star Bazaar received the silver award for 'Creating Consumer Value through Joint Promotional and Event Forecasting' at the 13th ECR Efficient Consumer Response Asia Pacific Conference. In 2011, HUL was named the most innovative company in India by Forbes and ranked 6th in the top 10 list of most innovative companies in the world. Hindustan Unilever Ltd received the National Award for Excellence in Corporate Governance 2011 of the Institute of Company Secretaries of India (ICSI) for excellence in corporate governance In 2012, Hindustan Unilever emerged as the No. 1 employer of choice for B-School students who will graduate in 2012. In addition, HUL also retained the 'Dream Employer' status for the 3rd year running Hindustan Unilever ranked No. 2 in Fortune India's Most Admired Companies list, which was released by Fortune India in partnership with the Hay Group. The company received the highest scores for endurance and financial soundness HUL was ranked 47th in The Brand Trust Report 2014 published by Trust Research Advisory. 36 HUL brands also featured in the list including Lux, Dove, Lipton, Vim, Kissan, Bru, Rexona, Close Up, Clinic Plus, Pond's, Knorr, and Pepsodent among others. HUL emerged as the top 'Dream Employer' as well as the top company considered for application in the annual B-School Survey conducted by Nielsen in November 2010. This was the second successive year that HUL has been rated as the top 'Dream Employer' in India. HUL has also emerged as the top employer of choice among the top six Indian Institutes of Management (IIMA, B, C, L, K and I). HUL won three awards at the 'CNBC Awaaz Storyboard Consumer Awards' in 2011 Most Recommended FMCG Company of the Year; Most Consumer Conscious Company of the Year and Digital Marketer of the Year. The company was felicitated in April 2010 for receiving the highest number of patents in the year 2009 at Annual Intellectual Property Awards 2010. In 2007, Hindustan Unilever was rated as the most respected company in India for the past 25 years by Businessworld, one of India's leading business magazines. The rating was based on a compilation of the magazine's annual survey of India's most reputed companies over the past 25 years. HUL is one of the country's largest exporters; it has been recognised as a Golden Super Star Trading House by the Government of India. The Hindustan Unilever Research Centre (HURC) was set up in 1967 in Mumbai, and Unilever Research India in Bangalore in 1997. Staff at these centres developed many innovations in products and manufacturing processes. In 2006, the company's research facilities were brought together at a single site in Bangalore. Unilever launched Sustainable Living Plan in on 15 November 2010 at London, Rotterdam, New York and New Delhi simultaneously. USLP India Progress Key Highlights for 2014: 63 million people through Lifebuoy Handwashing Programme since 2010. Pureit in-home water purifier has provided 65 billion litres of safe drinking water globally, by end of 2014. All childrens ice creams in India contain 110 kilocalories or fewer per portion. CO2 emission per tonne of production in India has reduced by 37%, water usage has reduced by 44% and total waste generation has reduced by 88% compared to 2008. HUL has created water conservation potential of nearly 100 billion litres through Hindustan Unilever Foundation partnerships. All 38 manufacturing locations have become zero non-hazardous waste to landfills. A total of 111 tea estates in Assam, West Bengal and Tamil Nadu were certified as 'Sustainable Estates' in 2014, taking the total to 222 'Sustainable Estates'. A total of 85% of tomatoes used in Kissan Ketchup are from sustainable sources. Project Shakti network has expanded to include over 70,000 Shakti Entrepreneurs (Shakti Ammas) and 48,000 Shaktimans. Hindustan Unilever's corporate headquarters are located at Andheri (E), Mumbai. The campus is spread over 12.5 acres of land and houses over 1,600 employees. Some of the facilities available for the employees include a convenience store, a food court, an occupational health centre, a gym, a sports & recreation centre and a day care centre. The campus received a certification from LEED (Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design) Gold in 'New Construction' category, by Indian Green Building Council (IGBC), Hyderabad, under license from the United States Green Building Council (USGBC) The company's previous headquarters was located at Backbay Reclamation, Mumbai at the Lever House, where it was housed for over 46 years. HUL also runs Hindustan Unilever Network (HULN), a direct selling business arm. Under HULN, health products are marketed by Ayush Therapy in collaboration with Arya Vaidya Pharmacy, Coimbatore; beauty products by Aviance; home products by Lever Home; and male grooming by D.I.Y. There are also premium products for beauty salons and others. In 2001 a thermometer factory in Kodaikanal run by Hindustan Unilever was accused of dumping glass contaminated with mercury in municipal dumps, or selling it on to scrap merchants unable to deal with it appropriately. Hindustan Unilever's "Fair and Lovely" is the leading skin-lightening cream for women in India. The company had to cease television advertisements for the product in 2007. Advertisements depicted depressed, dark-complexioned women, who had been ignored by employers and men, suddenly finding new boyfriends and glamorous careers after the cream had lightened their skin. In 2008 Hindustan Unilever made former Miss World Priyanka Chopra a brand ambassador for Pond's, and she then appeared in a mini-series of television commercials for another skin lightening product, 'White Beauty', alongside Saif Ali Khan and Neha Dhupia; these advertisements, showing Priyanka's face with a clearly darker complexion against the visibly fairer Neha Dhupia, were widely criticised for perpetuating racism and lowering the self-esteem of women and girls throughout India who were misled by HULN to believe that they needed to be white to be beautiful. Several academic papers have pointed out the firm's continued use of the antibacterial agent Triclosan ('Active B') in India because it is under review by the American Food and Drug Administration (US FDA). 