Hiroshima Prefecture (, Hiroshima-ken) is a prefecture of Japan located in the Chgoku region on Honshu island. The capital is the city of Hiroshima. It has a population of around 2.8 million. The area around Hiroshima was formerly divided into Bingo Province and Aki Province. This location has been a center of trade and culture since the beginning of Japan's recorded history. Hiroshima is a traditional center of the Chgoku region and was the seat of the Mri clan until the Battle of Sekigahara. Hiroshima is home to two UNESCO World Heritage sites: The Atomic Dome in Hiroshima, one of the few remnants of prewar Hiroshima following the atomic bombing in 1945; The Itsukushima Shrine in Miyajima, famed for filling with water and appearing to "float" during high tide. Hiroshima prefecture lies in the middle of Chgoku. Most of the prefecture consists of mountains leading towards Shimane Prefecture; and rivers produce rich plains near the coast. The province faces Shikoku across the Seto Inland Sea. Hiroshima Bay opens on the Inland Sea. The prefecture also includes many small islands. The sheltered nature of the Inland Sea makes Hiroshima's climate very mild. As of 1 April 2014, 4% of the total land area of the prefecture was designated as Natural Parks (the lowest percentage of any prefecture), namely Setonaikai National Park; Hiba-Dgo-Taishaku and Nishi-Chgoku Sanchi Quasi-National Parks; and six Prefectural Natural Parks. Fourteen cities are located in Hiroshima Prefecture: These are the towns in each district: Hiroshima's main industries include automobiles (Mazda is headquartered there) and shipbuilding (Kure was one of the main naval bases of the Imperial Japanese Navy and remains a major commercial yard). Hiroshima University Hiroshima Shudo University Prefectural University of Hiroshima Hiroshima University of Economics Hiroshima International University Hiroshima Bunka Gakuen University Hiroshima Bunkyo Women's University Hiroshima Cosmopolitan University Hiroshima Institute of Technology Hiroshima Kokusai Gakuin University Hiroshima City University Hiroshima Jogakuin University Hijiyama University Elisabeth University of Music Fukuyama University Fukuyama City University Fukuyama Heisei University Yasuda Women's University Onomichi City University Japan Coast Guard Academy JR West Sanyo Shinkansen Sanyo Main Line Kabe Line Kure Line Geibi Line Fukuen Line Ibara Railway Astram Line Skyrail Service Hiroshima Electric Railway = Chugoku Expressway Sanyo Expressway Shimanami Expressway Hamada Expressway Onomichi Expressway Hiroshima Expressway (West Nippon Expressway Company) Hiroshima Expressway (urban expressway) = Route 2 Route 31 Route 54 Route 182 Route 183 Route 185 Route 186 Route 191 Route 261 Route 313 Route 314 Route 317 Route 375 Route 432 Route 433 Route 434 Route 486 Route 487 Route 488 Kure Port - Ferry route to Edajima, Matsuyama Hiroshima Port - Ferry route to Miyajima, Edajima, Matsuyama and Beppu, and also International Container hub port Mihara Port Onomichi Port Fukuyama Port - International Container hub port Hiroshima Airport The sports teams listed below are based in Hiroshima. Sanfrecce Hiroshima (Hiroshima city) Hiroshima Toyo Carp (Hiroshima city) JT Thunders (Hiroshima city) Onomichi Port Festival - held in April Hiroshima Flower Festival - held from May 3 to 5 Fukuyama Rose Festival - held in May Enryuji Tokasan Festival - held in June Gion Festival of Onomichi - held in July Innoshima Water-naval Festival - held in August Miyajima Under-water Firework Festival - held on August 14 Yassa Festival of Mihara - held in August Saijo Sake Festival - held in October Onomichi Becher Festival - held on November 3 Hiroshima Ebisu Festival - held from November 18 to 20 