In statistics, Hodges estimator (or the HodgesLe Cam estimator), named for Joseph Hodges, is a famous counter example of an estimator which is "superefficient", i.e. it attains smaller asymptotic variance than regular efficient estimators. The existence of such a counterexample is the reason for the introduction of the notion of regular estimators. Hodges estimator improves upon a regular estimator at a single point. In general, any superefficient estimator may surpass a regular estimator at most on a set of Lebesgue measure zero. Suppose is a "common" estimator for some parameter : it is consistent, and converges to some asymptotic distribution L (usually this is a normal distribution with mean zero and variance which may depend on ) at the n-rate: Then the Hodges estimator is defined as This estimator is equal to everywhere except on the small interval [n1/4, n1/4], where it is equal to zero. It is not difficult to see that this estimator is consistent for , and its asymptotic distribution is for any R. Thus this estimator has the same asymptotic distribution as for all 0, whereas for = 0 the rate of convergence becomes arbitrarily fast. This estimator is superefficient, as it surpasses the asymptotic behavior of the efficient estimator at least at one point = 0. In general, superefficiency may only be attained on a subset of measure zero of the parameter space . Suppose x1, , xn is an iid sample from normal distribution N(, 1) with unknown mean but known variance. Then the common estimator for the population mean is the arithmetic mean of all observations: . The corresponding Hodges estimator will be , where 1{} denotes the indicator function. The mean square error (scaled by n) associated with the regular estimator x is constant and equal to 1 for all s. At the same time the mean square error of the Hodges estimator behaves erratically in the vicinity of zero, and even becomes unbounded as n . This demonstrates that the Hodges estimator is not regular, and its asymptotic properties are not adequately described by limits of the form ( fixed, n ). 