The Hong Kong Trade Development Council (HKTDC; Chinese: ) is a statutory body established in 1966 as the international marketing arm for Hong Kong-based manufacturers, traders and service providers. The organisation has more than 40 offices around the world, including 13 on the Chinese mainland. The HKTDC promotes Hong Kong as a platform for doing business with China and Asia, with opportunities in Hong Kong and on the mainland, while providing information via trade publications, research reports and online. The HKTDC is governed by a 19-member Council of Hong Kong business leaders and senior government officials. It plans and supervises the organisation's global operations, services and promotional activities. The Council also oversees the operation of the Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Centre. Vincent HS Lo is the ninth HKTDC Chairman since the Council's establishment. He started his term as Chairman on 1 June 2015. On 1 October 2014, Margaret Fong succeeded Fred Lam as the Executive Director of the HKTDC. Ms Fong is responsible for the HKTDC's worldwide operations. The HKTDC also organises more than 30 fairs each year. Nine of these fairs are the biggest of their kind in Asia, while three are the world's largest, namely, the HKTDC Hong Kong Gifts & Premium Fair, the HKTDC Hong Kong Watch & Clock Fair and the HKTDC Hong Kong Electronics Fair (Autumn Edition). HKTDC operates an online marketplace hktdc.com of 30 industries connecting more than 1.5 million global buyers with over 120,000 quality Hong Kong, China and Asia wholesale suppliers and manufacturers. With more than 45 years of experience in buyer-supplier matching, the hktdc.com facilitates worldwide buyers to source products and services from verified, quality suppliers and manufacturers. The Small-Order Zone is an online shopping site for global buyers to source and purchase quality products in small quantities. Tens of thousands of products are available online in low minimum order quantity(MOQ) at wholesale price by verified sellers. Buyers can instantly place orders and make payments online via credit cards or PayPal. The HKTDC publishes more than 20 print and online product magazines and industry supplements that reach more than five million global buyers in some 200 countries and regions each year. The HKTDC supports a series of bilateral economic and business committees. These business forums help promote economic ties between Hong Kong and the European Union, France, Japan, Korea, Taiwan, the United Kingdom and the United States. Ad-hoc meetings are also organised annually with various Chinese mainland provinces and municipalities and Taiwan. The HKTDC is headquartered in Hong Kong. As of 2015, it has around 40 offices which span six continents. In addition to its headquarters its operations comprise 13 offices across mainland China as well locations throughout the Asia Pacific, including Taipei, India, Japan and Australia. Beyond Asia, offices include: North American locations such as New York and Toronto, plus Latin America, 11 European cities, and premises in South Africa and the Middle East. The offices have various functions. They act as "a window for Hong Kong to the outside world", as two-way links between the relevant country or region, provide assistance for companies or individuals interested in doing business with Hong Kong, and as a liaison between the SAR Government and governments of the relevant country. Their work has had a significant effect in enhancing the international profile of Hong Kong. 