The Indiana Institute of Technology (commonly referred to as Indiana Tech) is a private non-profit, Ph.D.-granting university located in Fort Wayne, Allen County, Indiana, United States. It was founded as Indiana Technical College by John A. Kalbfleisch, who was also the school's first president. The college was founded in June 1930, and was incorporated as a proprietary school by the State of Indiana on January 10, 1931. The university today is organized into five colleges. The university specializes in career-oriented degree programs in business, engineering, computer science, education, criminal justice and others. In addition to the traditional semester-long class format, Indiana Tech also offers accelerated degree programs and online programs via its College of Professional Studies. Beyond its main campus in Fort Wayne, Indiana Tech maintains regional classroom and enrollment centers in 13 locations, including Elkhart, Evansville, Fishers, Greenwood, Huntington, Indianapolis, Jeffersonville, Kendallville, Mishawaka, Munster and Warsaw in Indiana; and Louisville and Fort Wright in Kentucky. Indiana Tech also has two enrollment centers in the Chicago area, located in Naperville and Wilmette, Illinois. Student athletics, both organized and intramural, are an important part of student life. Indiana Tech fields eleven men's and eleven women's teams that compete in the NAIA, in which Indiana Tech is a member of the Wolverine-Hoosier Athletic Conference for all intercollegiate athletics. Indiana Technical College was founded in 1930 as a for-profit private technical college by John A. Kalbfleisch, a former president of Indiana Business College, a for-profit business school. Indiana Tech was formally incorporated in 1931 and opened for classes that same year. The school was rechartered in August 1948 as a non-profit, endowed college. In 1953, Indiana Tech purchased the 20-acre (8.1 ha) campus of Concordia Theological Seminary, east of downtown Fort Wayne, from the Lutheran ChurchMissouri Synod, as Concordia was moving to its current suburban location north of Fort Wayne. In 1963 college's name was changed from Indiana Technical College to Indiana Institute of Technology. Indiana Tech offers associate, bachelor's, master's, and doctoral degrees. Indiana Tech is organized into the following colleges: College of Business College of Engineering & Computer Sciences College of General Studies College of Professional Studies Law School The College of Business offers degrees in accounting and business administration. The business administration programs offer students the opportunity to choose concentrations that fit their career goals including business communications, entrepreneurial studies, financial services, health care administration, human resources, management, management information systems, marketing, and sports management. The College of Engineering and Computer Sciences offers a variety of degrees for student interested in technology careers. Engineering majors include biomedical, computer, electrical, energy, industrial & manufacturing, and mechanical engineering. Majors in computer science include digital graphics & design, network management, web development, information systems, computer security and investigation, networking, and software engineering. The College of General Studies rounds out the university's degree offerings with additional career-oriented degrees. This college includes the School of Education and the Center for Criminal Justice. Other majors include communication, psychology, recreation management, and therapeutic recreation. The College of Professional Studies adapts selected majors from the other three colleges for an accelerated format. Courses for undergraduate students are generally in 5 week sessions, with 9 sessions scheduled per year. Graduate classes are generally 6 weeks in length; notating that specific accounting and mathematics courses are extended to 10 and 12 weeks, respectively. Indiana Tech holds 8 graduate sessions per year. Classes meet once a week at classroom locations around Indiana, or can be taken online. The College of Professional Studies includes all of the university's graduate programs. Indiana Tech Law School began classes in the Fall semester of 2013. It is currently not accredited by the American Bar Association, but has begun the accreditation application process, pursuant to ABA rules requiring operation for one year prior to seeking said accreditation. The university administration has publicly stated that it fully intends to qualify for ABA approval after the requisite waiting period. The university is approved and officially recognized by the U.S. Office of Education and the U.S. State Department and is approved by the State Approval Agency for the enrollment of veterans and eligible persons. Additionally, the university is a member of the Council for Adult and Experiential Learning (CAEL) and adheres to its policies and practices. The athletic teams for Indiana Tech are known as the Warriors, their colors are orange and black with white accent. The university currently is a member of the Wolverine-Hoosier Athletic Conference in the National Association of Intercollegiate Athletics and offers 22 intercollegiate athletic programs (the ice hockey team plays in Division I of the American Collegiate Hockey Association): Indiana Tech athletes have achieved notable success at the individual and team levels. Warrior teams have won 7 national titles, including in Women's Lacrosse and most recently in Men's and Women's Track and Field, with the Warrior men earning four straight NAIA national titles starting with the 2013 outdoor national championship. The women's track and field team has been similarly dominant, with the team earning back-to-back outdoor NAIA national titles in 2013 and 2014. Over the years, Indiana Tech teams have collectively earned 99 national tournament appearances, 34 WHAC regular season championships, and 17 WHAC tournament championships. Individually, the university has produced 451 All-Americans, 308 Daktronics NAIA Scholar-Athletes, and 32 NAIA Individual National Champions. Indiana Tech has a variety of activities and organizations contributing to student life on campus, including many events organized each year through its office of Student Life. The main campus features a movie theater showing free weekly features; a performing arts theater for live performances; a rec center with a bowling alley, video gaming, pool and ping-pong tables and more; an art gallery featuring 3-4 new exhibits each year; and two main dining facilities, including a cafe featuring Starbucks coffee in its new Academic Center. Indiana Tech also regularly hosts outside performing arts groups and notable speakers from diverse backgrounds in education, business, public service, law and more. Indiana Tech is also home to a variety of clubs, honor societies, student professional organizations, a local sorority and a national fraternity. Greek Organizations Sigma Phi Epsilon national fraternity Delta Alpha Nu local sorority Clubs Alpha Chi Honor Society Cyber Defense Team Delta Epsilon Iota Career-Focused Honorary Society Fellowship of Christian Athletes Sport Recreation and Leisure Society Professional Organizations Association for Computing Machinery Society of Automotive Engineers Institute of Electrical & Electronics Engineers Society for Human Resource Management American Society of Mechanical Engineers Society of Manufacturing Engineers Society of Women Engineers National Society of Black Engineers Phi Epsilon Kappa Biomedical Engineering Society Indiana Student Education Association Collegiate Cyber Defense Society of Future Accountants Rodney Bartholomew, professional basketball players JuJuan Cooley, professional basketball player Josh Judy, Major League Baseball pitcher Jesse Hoover, Minor League Baseball pitcher Brandon Alger, Minor League Baseball pitcher S. Thomas Wong, Responsible for creation of Shake N Bake Lowell G. Krandell, Designed Indiana's first fiber optics system Stanley John Puskarz, Invented the pop-top lid and the screw off bottle cap Young Jung Paik, Founder and Chairman of Paco Steel and Engineering Corporation, the nation's largest producer of patented light-steel I-beams; Named Entrepreneur of the Year in 1999 by Ernst & Young Adolf Vartanian, Senior member of the Brotherhood of St. Andrew. Incorporated by Congress in 1908 Joseph J. Foster III, LT. Col. USAF (Retired) - logged 5,750 hours in 19 different prop, turbo-prop and jet aircraft and flew 1,165 combat support sorties in Vietnam from 1966 to 1967 Clarence "Casey" Forrest, Bell Aircraft - He worked on the X-1 and completed his career as senior vice president at Textron in charge of flight test for LCAC (Land Craft Air Cushion) vehicles used by United States Marines. He was inducted into the Niagara Frontier Aviation Hall of Fame. Walter T. Weller, Responsible for calibrating the instruments on the first plane to break the sound barrier and worked in "Little Joe" capsules that later became part of the Mercury space program Stanley Clemenz, 61 years in telecommunications engineering (satellites, manned spacecraft, network sites), aerospace (Mercury, Gemini, Apollo), shipbuilding (cruisers, destroyers, amphibious warfare ships), automobile production (Ford), subway systems (BART, Metrorail), oceanography (sonar, atomic bomb testing). He was also a LT. (JG) in the Navy during WWII H. Robert Gill, Quickly moved up the ranks at Magnavox, eventually overseeing the $50 million international marine electronics division; became president of the Ball Corporation's Industrial Systems Division where he created a new industrial instruments and systems business and grew it to $21 million in sales worldwide; chairman of the board for the Boulder Innovation Center and chairman emeritus of the Deming Center for Entrepreneurship at the University of Colorado; sought-after adviser/consultant James R. Bard, Co-Owner Bard Manufacturing which, over the past 40 years, has grown to be the largest U.S. manufacturer of wall-mounted HVAC products; 2001 Northwest Ohio Entrepreneur of the Year; 2004 Air Conditioning and Refrigeration Institute lifetime achievement award Frank Oropeza, Founded Transpo, an automotive voltage regulator manufacturing company that started in his garage and grew to 700 employees with an annual revenue in excess of $100 million Ronald A. Ostrowski, Worked for Boeing and was instrumental in the design and development of numerous aircraft, including the 737, 747, 757, 767, and 777; 1995 Collier Trophy Team Award for design and introduction of the 777; Aviation and Space Technology's Laureates Hall of Fame for Aeronautics and Propulsion in 1996; and the Daniel Guggenheim Medal for Achievement in the Advancement of Aeronautics in 1998 Robert R. Featheringham, Highly successful, 40-year career with defense contracting companies in the Washington, D.C. area where he worked on multi-million dollar contracts and billion-dollar projects; later established Two Feathers Consulting to provide business development and management consulting services to the United States Army Rear Admiral David J. Nash, 33-year career in the Navy; served as Resident Officer in Charge of Construction at naval installations in Argentina, Newfoundland, and Point Mugu, California, before shipping overseas to Vietnam, where he served until 1970; by 1995, served as Commander, Pacific Division Naval Facilities Command, responsible for the Navy's facilities across eleven time zones in the Pacific Command region, including command of the Third Naval Construction Brigade in Pearl Harbor; named chief of civil engineers, he ascended to the top of the Navy's Civil Engineer Corps as Commander, Naval Facilities Engineering Command and Organization; served as Director of Iraq Program Management Office (PMO) under Coalition Provisional Authority and later, as Director of the Iraq Reconstruction Management Office (IRMO) under the U.S. State Department; continues to serve the private sector since retiring from the U.S. Navy in 1998 