The International Violin Competition of Indianapolis is a major classical violin competition which takes place once every four years in Indianapolis, Indiana. Since 1984, it has been a member of the World Federation of International Music Competitions. The first International Violin Competition of Indianapolis was first held in 1982, directed by Josef Gingold. It was open to violinists aged eighteen to thirty, and its prize was a gold medal and 10 000 United States dollars. The competition was originally organized as an isolated event, but Gingold decided to repeat it because of its success. For the second competition in 1986, Dorothy DeLay, Ruggiero Ricci, Henryk Szeryng, and Ilona Feher all sat on the jury. For the 2014 series, the competition commissioned composer Ellen Taaffe Zwilich to write Fantasy for Solo Violin, which sixteen semi-finalists played in the second round of the competition. On July 8, 2014, the competition announced that Zwilich would also be on the jury, taking the place of violinist Pamela Frank, who resigned because of a family illness. The other members of the 2014 jury were Jaime Laredo, Miriam Fried, Dong-Suk Kang, Boris Kuschnir, Cho-Liang Lin, Philip Setzer, Dmitry Sitkovetsky, and Kyoko Takezawa. The reward for winning first prize in the 2014 Indianapolis Violin Competition is a recital in Carnegie Hall, the opportunity to use Gingold's former Stradivarius violin for four years, and 30 000 United States dollars. The competition is separated into three parts: Preliminaries. The first round of the competition is 45 minutes long per competitor, and is composed of works from Mozart's Violin sonatas, J.S. Bach's Sonatas and partitas for solo violin, and Paganini's 24 Caprices for Solo Violin. Each participant must also perform an encore work. Semi-Finals. In the next round, each competitor plays for 75 minutes, including a commissioned work and a Beethoven sonata. Finals. The finals are split into two parts: in the first part, the competitors each play a classical concerto, and in the second part, they each play a romantic concerto. They perform with the Indianapolis Symphony Orchestra. From the competition website. 