The International New York Times is an English language international newspaper. It combines the resources of its own correspondents with those of The New York Times and is printed at 38 sites throughout the world, for sale in more than 160 countries and territories. Based in Paris since 1887, the newspaper is part of The New York Times Company. From 1967 it was published as the International Herald Tribune and was renamed on October 15, 2013. The Paris Herald was founded on 4 October 1887, as the European edition of the New York Herald by the parent papers owner, James Gordon Bennett, Jr. The company was based in Neuilly-sur-Seine, a suburb of Paris. After the 1918 death of Bennett, Frank Andrew Munsey bought the New York Herald and the Paris Herald. Munsey sold the Herald newspapers in 1924 to the New York Tribune, and the Paris Herald became the Paris Herald Tribune while the New York paper became New York Herald Tribune. The newspaper became a mainstay of American expatriate culture in Europe. In Ernest Hemingways 1926 novel The Sun Also Rises, the first thing the novels protagonist Jake Barnes does on returning from Spain to France is to buy the New York Herald from a kiosk in Bayonne and read it at a cafe. In Jean-Luc Godards 1960 film Breathless, the female lead character Patricia (played by Jean Seberg) is an American student journalist who sells the New York Herald Tribune on the streets of Paris. Pages from the days paper can be seen tacked up through the office windows, a tradition that was to continue with the International Herald Tribune. In 1959 John Hay Whitney, a businessman and United States Ambassador to the United Kingdom, bought the New York Herald Tribune and its European edition. In 1966 the New York Herald Tribune was merged into the short-lived New York World Journal Tribune and ceased publication, but the Whitney family kept the Paris paper going through partnerships. In December 1966 The Washington Post became a joint owner. The New York Times became a joint owner of the Paris Herald Tribune in May 1967, whereupon the newspaper became known as the International Herald Tribune (IHT). In 1974, IHT began transmitting facsimile pages of the paper between nations and opened a printing site near London. In 1977 the paper opened a second site in Zrich. IHT began transmitting electronic images of newspaper pages from Paris to Hong Kong via satellite in 1980, making the paper simultaneously available on opposite sides of the planet. This was the first such intercontinental transmission of an English-language daily newspaper and followed the pioneering efforts of the Chinese-language newspaper Sing Tao Daily (). In 1991, The Washington Post and The New York Times became sole and equal shareholders of IHT. In February 2005 it opened its Asia newsroom in Hong Kong. In April 2001, the Japanese newspaper Asahi Shimbun () tied up with IHT and published an English-language newspaper, the International Herald Tribune/Asahi Shimbun. After The Washington Post left IHT, it continued being published under the name International Herald Tribune/Asahi Shimbun, but it was discontinued on February 2011. In 2003, IHT was completely owned by The New York Times Company, after that firm purchased the 50% stake owned by The Washington Post Company on 30 December 2002. The takeover ended a 35-year partnership between the two domestic competitors. The Post was forced to sell when the Times threatened to pull out and start a competing paper. As a result, the Post entered into an agreement to publish selected articles in The Wall Street Journals European edition. After the takeover the newspaper was been subtitled The Global Edition of the New York Times. In 2008, the NYT Company announced the merger of the New York Times and IHT websites. In March 2009 the IHT website became the global version of NYTimes.com. In 2013, the New York Times Company announced that the newspaper itself would be renamed The International New York Times to reflect the companys focus on its core New York Times newspaper and to build its international presence. On 14 October 2013 the International Herald Tribune appeared on newsstands for the last time. It came with a supplemental section, titled Turning the Page I, a retrospective on the Herald Tribunes past articles, photographs and place in newspaper history. On October 15, 2013, the International New York Times debuted with a Premier Edition flash above the masthead. It came with a supplement titled Turning the Page II, which discussed and predicted likely developments in many global areas including energy, finance, technology and media. The International New York Times comes under criticism annually, for hosting a conference in London titled Oil & Money; a film was also made about the 2014 Oil & Money event by Nimrod Kamer. While the International New York Times shares many columnists with The New York Times, it has its own voice, particularly in the field of culture. Well-known commentators include Alice Rawsthorn on design and Souren Melikian on art. Jonathan Spollen, an Irish copy editor at the papers Hong Kong bureau went missing while in northern India in February 2012, sparking an international campaign to locate him. Spollens local MP Eoghan Murphy appealed for support for the campaign in the Irish Parliament. Affiliations with international newspapers include: Asahi Shimbun (Japan) Le Figaro (France) The Japan Times (Japan) JoongAng Daily (South Korea) Haaretz (Israel) Kathimerini (Greece) El Pas (Spain). A daily, eight-page English-language version of El Pas comes with the Spanish edition of INYT. The Express Tribune (Pakistan) The Malaysian Reserve (Malaysia) Repblica (Nepal) The Jakarta Post (Indonesia) Ara (Catalonia) Typically, the affiliation consists of an English-language edition of the local newspaper circulated together with the INYT. 