Just the Ten of Us is an American sitcom starring stand-up comedian Bill Kirchenbauer as Coach Graham Lubbock, a teacher and the head of a large Catholic family with eight children living in Eureka, California. The series is a spin-off of Growing Pains, in which Kirchenbauer portrayed the same character on a recurring basis. As the series progressed, Coach Lubbock's four eldest daughters, the teenagers Marie (Heather Langenkamp), Cindy (Jamie Luner), Wendy (Brooke Theiss), and Connie (JoAnn Willette), became the primary focus of the show. Just the Ten of Us aired on ABC starting with a trial run on April 26, 1988 and ending on May 17, 1990. After the first four episodes in an abbreviated first season were aired, the show was renewed for two more seasons, eventually ending after 47 episodes on May 4, 1990. The show was a part of ABC's early TGIF programming block. The series focuses on Graham Lubbock (Bill Kirchenbauer), a Catholic gym teacher who used to teach at the high school that Growing Pains characters Mike and Carol Seaver (Kirk Cameron and Tracey Gold) had attended; and the father of eight children. In the pilot episode (which aired on Growing Pains in the spring of 1988), Graham's job is in jeopardy due to district budget cutbacks. Mike leads a protest after he learns that Lubbock is trying to support a large family (including yet another baby-on-the-way). Word of this spreads, and Graham's fate is sealed; he loses his job. However, he is soon offered a job at St. Augustine's Academy, an all-boys private Catholic school in Eureka, California. Graham promptly moves his family to California. Six of Graham's children were girls, four of them teenagers. They were: Marie (Heather Langenkamp) - the oldest, most responsible, and most pious. Cindy (Jamie Luner) - Wendy's older twin sister, and the most ditzy. Wendy (Brooke Theiss) - Cindy's younger twin sister, and the most flirtatious. Connie (JoAnn Willette) - the Bohemian, and also occasionally agnostic. His younger daughters were eight-year-old Sherry (Heidi Zeigler) and infant Melissa. By special arrangement, the older girls were allowed to attend St. Augustine's, much to the chagrin of the school's administration (and, of course, much delight of the male students). Graham and Elizabeth's sons were 11-year-old Graham, Jr. (Matt Shakman), familiarly known as "J.R.", and toddler Harvey (Jason and Jeremy Korstjens). The first season consisted of four episodes for a trial run in the spring of 1988. ABC was pleased with their success and ordered a second season. In the second season, Cindy and Wendy seemed to switch personalities, with Cindy becoming more ditzy, and Wendy becoming the schemer. Also, the show focused more and more on the four older girls and frequently revolved around the family's efforts to save money, dating, and other typical family sitcom issues. In later episodes, the four teenage girls formed a singing group called "The Lubbock Babes" (partly to help bring in much-needed extra income). The girls had many boyfriends and love interests that Graham took great pride in testing---and in most cases, fending off---but the most permanent fixture among them was Marie's goofy boyfriend, Gavin Doosler (Evan Arnold). Those on the St. Augustine's staff included Father Frank Hargis (Frank Bonner), the affable headmaster; Coach Duane Johnson (Dennis Haysbert), Graham's earnest young assistant during the first two seasons; and in the third season, featured teachers Father Bud (Lou Richards) and elderly, madcap Sister Ethel (Maxine Elliott). Bill Kirchenbauer as Coach Graham T. Lubbock Deborah Harmon as Elizabeth Lubbock Heather Langenkamp as Marie Lubbock Jamie Luner as Cynthia "Cindy" Lubbock Brooke Theiss as Wendy Lubbock JoAnn Willette as Constance Sarah "Connie" Lubbock Matt Shakman as Graham "J.R." Lubbock, Jr. Heidi Zeigler as Sherry Lubbock Jason and Jeremy Korstjens as Harvey Lubbock Frank Bonner as Father Frank Hargis, Headmaster of St. Augustine's Academy Dennis Haysbert as Duane Johnson, Coach Lubbock's assistant (1988-1989) Evan Arnold as Gavin Doosler Lou Richards as Father Bud (1989-1990) Maxine Elliott as Sister Ethel (1989-1990) USA Network picked up the entire series in reruns shortly after it was canceled, and aired the show on a daily basis until 1996. 