Kim Hyung-Soo (Hangul: ; born December 30, 1981), better known by his stage name K.Will (Hangul: ) is a South Korean ballad singer-songwriter, vocal coach, and DJ at 107.7 SBS Power FM (using his real name as his DJ name). K.Will first became known in South Korea through his single Dream in A Love to Kill OST, released in 2006. A year after his single, he released his first album Left Heart in 2007. K.Will came back with a successful single, "Love 119," in December 2008. This was followed by a mini album Dropping the Tears in April 2009 and his second album Miss, Miss and Miss in November 2009. K.Will has a great deal of collaborations and drama soundtracks to his name, and has shown an ability to rap and dance. K.Will showed his love for music and singing in his childhood. He often sang with his mother while she played a guitar. After graduating from high school, he told his parents that he wanted to be a singer. However, his parents were against the idea and convinced him that it should not be his primary job. Ultimately, two jobs proved too difficult to manage at once, so he decided to focus on music. K.Will participated in auditions and looked for potential song-writers to collaborate with. When K.Will was a trainee, he would do anything to sing, such as performing at street concerts, singing backup, or singing the chorus for famous artists. During that time, he developed friendships with now well-known artists like 8Eight, Lim Jeong-Hee, SG Wannabe and Sweet Sorrow. During his work as a vocal guide (guide vocalist), K.Will also was a part of an amateur a cappella group and performed at street concerts around the country for two years. K.Will was frequently mistaken as the songwriter of TVXQ's Hug until the issue was clarified by an interview on KBS World. When K.Will was helping Rain produce his second album, he was noticed by Park Jin-Young, an influential producer in the Korean music industry. Park Jin-Young wrote and composed the title track of K.Will's first album Left Heart. K.Will's first album, titled "Left Heart" was released on March 6, 2007. Though "Left Heart" is noted as K.Wills debut album, he had already performed his debut stage with Lim Jeong-hee (Street Dive also known as J-Lim) in 2006. During this time, videos of K.Will singing some of Mariah Careys songs surfaced online. K.Will had sung "Without You," "My All," and "I Still Believe", and performed them so well that netizens nicknamed him the male Mariah in Korea. Soon more videos surfaced, notably of him singing the high notes in Celine Dion's song "My Heart Will Go On" from the movie Titanic. On December 2, 2008, K.Will released the digital single "Love 119", a collaboration with the well-known rapper MC Mong. The single achieved #1 on online charts and ranked #2 on the KBS Music Bank K-Chart without any promotions. Motivated by the popularity of "Love 119", K.Will released a mini album titled "Dropping the Tears" on March 31, 2009. His deep, husky and beautiful voice made the title track with the same name as the album full of emotion and it also reached #1 on online charts, though at a slower pace than "Love 119." He worked with two members of Girls' Generation, Yuri and Tiffany for this album: Yuri appeared in his "Dropping the Tears" music video while Tiffany sang a duet with him called "Girl, Meets Love". K.Will and Tiffany performed this on Music Core in July 2009. During the album promotions, Lee Min-Ho, the lead actor of KBS Boys Over Flowers, asked K.Will for vocal training. With K.Will's help, Lee Min-Ho was able to sing the song "My Everything". Not long before ending the mini album promotions, K.Will surprised audiences with his versatility by doing a special stage with Outsider the fastest rapper in South Korea, and K.Will rapped almost as fast as him in the song "Loner". Because of the popularity of the Brilliant Legacy OST (in which he participated), he was invited to join the "Korean Music Festival 2009" in Japan, along with T-Max and Jo Sung-Mo. He made his debut in acting in the "Soul Special: Music Drama" where he worked with Han Hyo-Joo. The drama Soul Special was a revolution in the entertainment business since all episodes were only released online. In October 2009, a few weeks before the release of his second album, K.Will was diagnosed with the H1N1 virus. Though he recovered in less than a week, his second album was postponed until November 5, 2009. His title track, "Miss, Miss and Miss" was a moderate success and reached its peak at #8 on the KBS Music Bank K-Chart. He also collaborated with Outsider in this album, after their success during the summer. However, their song "Hypnosis" was banned by KBS because it contained the word mute and so his follow-up promotions for "Miss, Miss and Miss" were cancelled. On December 25, 2009, (Christmas Day) K.Will held his first solo concert. Tickets sold out faster than that of any other solo artist. K.Will debuted in the U.S.A. on "THE THREE ROMANTICISTS" concert along with Kim Bum Soo and Yoo Seung-Chan on March 5, 2010. His single titled "Present" was released on March 10, 2010 and achieved #1 on many online music charts. K.Will embarked on his first solo concert in Japan, "K.WILL Live Concert with Band in Tokyo" in May 2010 and "K.WILL Live Concert with Band in Osaka" in July 2010. On the July 31st, K.Will appeared on the music show "The MUZIT" as one of the main MCs along with upperclassmen singer Yoo Young Suk . On the first episode K.Will and Charice performed the duet "Endless Love". At the end of year, K.Wills two-day Christmas concert was completely sold out. A year after his second album, K.Will released another digital single featuring Simon D and Hyorin of Sistar titled "Amazed" on January 21, 2011. The song rapidly reached to the top of the several music charts. Seven weeks later, K.Will's second mini album was released and he held a live showcase, performance, and released the music video for "My Heart is Beating" in which Lee Joon (MBLAQ) and IU starred. The title track of this album was an all-kill on music charts. Five years since his debut, K.Will finally won the Mutizen on SBS Inkigayo. K.Will successfully completed his third solo concert, "My Heart Is Beating" at the Olympic Park Hall on June 25, 2011. He has also participated several variety shows such as "We Got Married" with Kim Hyung Jun, the drama "Spy Myung Wol" and the reality show "Immortal Songs 2" nearly the end of the year. As with the tradition, he ended the year with a 3-day Christmas concert. After joining KBS TV "Immortal Songs 2" in November 2011, K.Will left the show after winning three times, and set the new record, winning against 5 consecutive singers in the leaving episode on January 21, 2012. On February 14, 2012 (Valentine's Day), K.Will released his 3rd mini album "I Need You" two weeks after releasing a digital single of one of the songs from the mini album entitled "I Hate Myself". On the same day, K.Will also unveiled a music video for "I Need You" on Starship Entertainments official YouTube channel, which features Sistar's Bora, actors Ji Chang Wook and Yeo Jin Gu. "I Need You" peaked at No. 2 on the Billboard K-Pop Hot 100., while "I Hate Myself" peaked at no. 6. The album marked the five-year anniversary of K.Wills first debut as a singer-songwriter. His self-composed song, "I'll Be With You" is also included and is dedicated to all his fans who believed in him. He was also the co-writer the lyrics of "I'm Will". K.Will earned his first K-Chart award since his debut 6 years ago on KBS Music Bank for his track "I Need You." On October 7, Starship Entertainment revealed some photos of K.Will's recent photoshoot for his upcoming album. The album "Third Album, Part 1" was released on October 11 along with the MV for "Please Don't...", the title track. Promotions for "Please Don't..." were the most successful in K.Will's career to date. The music video starred Seo In-guk, Sistar's Dasom, and Ahn Jae-hyun, and was praised for its originality. It was also notable for its twist ending involving Seo's character revealing he is actually in love with Ahn's. On February 14, 2013 (Valentine's Day again), Powerhouse Live (U.S.) presented K.Will in a Valentine's Day solo concert in the Orpheum Theatre in Los Angeles, California. He performed his hits, some including "Please Don't," "I Need You," "My Heart is Beating," and "Love 119". On April 3, 2013 K.Will released his new single, "Love Blossom". On October 19, 2013 K.Will released his new album, "Will in Fall". The music video for the album's single, "You Don't Know Love," starring EXO rapper Chanyeol and South Korean model Lee Ho Jung, came out two days later, on October 21. On June 25, 2014 K.Will released his mini album, "One Fine Day". The music video for the title track, "Day 1," starred Sistar's Soyou and Park Min-woo. On March 25, 2015 K.Will released his mini album, "[Re:]". The music video for the title track, "Growing," starred Son Ho-jun and Park Ha-sun. Left Heart (2007) Missing You (2009) I Need You (2011) The Third Album Part 1 (2012) The Third Album Part 2: Love Blossom (2013) The Fourth Mini Album : Will in Fall (2013) One Fine Day (2014) RE: (2015) When he released his first album, he got compliments from established entertainer Rain, who said "I believe hes one of the best vocalists of 2007. [...] K.Will has a voice that I really like. His talent is amazing, plus he has even refined it for such a long time. He exerts himself incessantly." Rains mentor and songwriter Park Jin-Young once mentioned "People say the songs I wrote are really difficult for other singers to sing in their own style, as they have too much of my personality. But "Left Heart", people dont even know that its my song because K.Will perfectly interpreted the song in his style." He also said "This is the perfect singer which Im looking for." Actor Lee Min-ho expressed: Im very touched. I listened to the songs repeatedly. K.Wills unique grief voice blended well with the lyrics. This main theme song is really good. 