Kelvin Grove is a suburb of Palmerston North, New Zealand. It is bounded on the north by the North Island Main Trunk Railway, Manawatu District and Milson, on the west by Palmerston North-Gisborne Railway and Roslyn, the south by Manawatu River and the east by James Line, and Whakarongo. Kelvin Grove is the home of Foodstuffs Distribution Centre, Coca-Cola Amatil, Toyota New Zealand and Progressive Enterprises Distribution Centre in Palmerston North. Kelvin Grove itself is a relatively new suburb, with housing beginning in the 1960s. The suburb itself is mostly rural, however there is a sizeable growth in development in the area which should soon see the suburb becoming more residential. Kelvin Grove has three schools. They are Cornerstone Christian School, Te Kura Kaupapa o Manawatu and Westmount School. However, it is more likely children from Kelvin Grove would attend nearby Roslyn School. There is also a kindergarten here. The area was also home to fuel depots. Peppertree Rest Home is located on Roberts Line. At the 2001 Census of Population and Dwellings: Kelvin Grove had a population of 3,240. [1] The original inhabitants of the area were the local Rangitne iwi, and was part of the Te-Ahu- a-Turanga Block which was sold by Rangitne in 1865. The first Europeans arrived in Kelvin Grove in 1871 when Scandinavian immigrants settled in the area around present day Roberts Line-James Line and Napier Road block. This area and also that of Whakarongo, became known as the Stoney Creek Scandinavian Block. At this time the area was mainly thick forest, which had to be felled in order for settlement. This was achieved by the mid-1870s. In 1893, Kelvin Grove School was established and Kelvin Grove as an entity of its own was established. Kelvin Grove was the name of the local sawmill (which had opened in 1879). In 1901, Kelvin Grove Hall was built. In 1921, however, the Hall burnt down and was not replaced until 1935. In 1939, Kelvin Grove School closed down, due to parents choosing other schools such as Milson or Terrace End. In 1950, part of Kelvin Grove was brought under the jurisdiction of Palmerston North City, but it was not until 1966 when houses began to appear especially in the Karamea Crescent and Mahia Place area. [2] Kelvin Grove's street name themes vary from those of New Zealand place names (Kaimanawa, Anakiwa, Karamea, Mahia, Wairau) plants (Acacia) or even those of past Councillors (Mihaere). Kaimanawa Park Celaeno Park Kelvin Grove Park Linklater Block Schnell Reserve Schnell Esplanade Reserve Robrt Reserve Frederick Krull Reserve Dahlstrom Reserve James Line Reserve Parnell Reserve Kelvin Grove is a part of the Papaioea Ward in the Palmerston North City Council. It shares this with other suburbs, Milson, Papaioea, Palmerston North Hospital Area, Roslyn. Prior to 1996, Kelvin Grove was part of the Manawatu electorate. This electorate included parts of Palmerston North, east of Ruahine Street as well as Linton Camp, Turitea, Aokautere and Roslyn. However, due to the reformation of the electoral system from FPP to MMP, the electorate of Rangitikei's boundaries were redrawn to include Kelvin Grove. A 2007 boundary redistribution includes Kelvin Grove in the Palmerston North electorate. 