Kornhill (Chinese: ) and Kornhill Gardens () are apartment buildings on the northern slope of Mount Parker, in Quarry Bay, Hong Kong Island, Hong Kong. Kornhill is a private housing estate and Kornhill Gardens is a Private Sector Participation Scheme estate. The total population is approximately 30,000. The name comes from a small hill within the area close to the foot of Mount Parker. Kornhill was the site of the company residence of the senior manager of the Taikoo Sugar Refinery and the first senior manager was Ferdinand Korn. The hill was almost level by the early 1980s, and can hardly be recognised. The modern-day housing estate was constructed in concert with the MTR Island Line and opened by 1987. There are a total 44 blocks, with heights ranging from 20 to 34 storeys, including 42 conventional residential buildings, one block of serviced apartments, and an office tower. The residential blocks in Kornhill are named after English letters and there are two blocks of each letter (i.e. A1, A2, D1, D2, P1, P2.) In Kornhill Gardens, the blocks are named in Arabic numbers from 1 to 10. Kornhill Gardens blocks are sold under the HOS Scheme. Blocks A1 to H2 are on Hong Shing Street (). Blocks J1 to M2 are on Hong Yue Street (). Blocks N1 to R2 are on Hong On Street (). There is no block I, O, and S to Z. Blocks 1 to 10 are on southern side (western bound) of King's Road. MTR Property is responsible for management. They were developed by Hang Lung, New World Development, and MTR Property. There are two primary schools: Shanghai Alumni Primary School () Buddhist Chung Wah Kornhill Primary School () and nine kindergartens: Kornhill Anglo-Chinese Kindergarten () (Catholic) Kornhill International Kindergarten () (Catholic) Kornhill Japanese Kindergarten () (Catholic) Kornhill Christian Anglo-Chinese Kindergarten () (Protestant) Creativity (Kornhill Gardens) Child Care Centre (()) Victoria Infant & Toddler Playland () Victoria (Kornhill) International Kindergarten (()) Victoria Kindergarten + Victoria International Nursery (,) Greeneries are all around the residential areas. A recreation club, in two phases (one near Block B and another near Block H) with two swimming pools, six tennis courts, one squash court, a fitness gymnasium, and a barbecue site is available to club members only. The Tai Tam Country Park (Quarry Bay Extension) is right next to Hong Shing Street. A shopping mall Kornhill Plaza () (North and South, and ) is in between Kornhill and Kornhill Gardens, acrossing Kornhill Road. A department store AEON is in Kornhill Plaza South. On top of Kornhill Plaza South is the Kornhill Apartments (), and on top of Kornhill Plaza North is the Kornhill Metro Tower office building. Kornhill is served by Tai Koo MTR station on the Island Line. Tram stops and bus stops are available at Kornhill Road. Public bus service by First Bus, Citybus and KMB (KMB serves only cross-harbour routes) at Kornhill Road and King's Road. Minibus service to North Point (33), Shau Kei Wan (32), and within Kornhill between Hong Shing Street and Tai Koo MTR station Hong On Street (33M), Mount Parker Lodge (32A), Wanchai and Kennedy Town (Red non-franchised minibuses) The Hong Shing Street, Hong On Street, and Hong Yue Street and the Kornhill side (southern side, west bound) of King's Road are restricted and not open to public buses to avoid nuisance to residents. Greig Road Hong Shing Street Hong Yue Street Hong On Street Kornhill Road King's Road Sai Wan Terrace An entrance to the west bound of Route 4, i.e. Island Eastern Corridor (IEC) and Route 2, i.e. the Eastern Harbour Crossing (EHC) is available at the junction of Hong Yue and Hong On streets. Kornhill has two constituencies within the Eastern District Council. Blocks A1 to M2, together with Sai Wan Terrace and The Floridian, are in the Kornhill () constituency. Blocks N1 to R2, and blocks 1 to 10 are in the Kornhill Gardens () constituency. The current district council members of Kornhill to the Eastern District Council are and EUNG. Yuk Chu Ting, the current chair of the council and an appointed member, used to be elected through the constituency of LEUNG. In the Legislative Council elections, Kornhill belongs to the Hong Kong Island constituencies. 