A 2-in-1 tablet or 2-in-1 laptop is a category of a portable computer device, combining the abilities of a tablet and a laptop. Different variants of the term exist, such as laplet or 2-in-1. 2-in-1's can effectively be used both as tablet and as laptop. They are built using a standard portable PC components, in light and thin chassis that can be transformed into a slate tablet form. 2-in-1's therefore in one position are convenient for media consumption and typical non-intensive tablet work, such as web browsing. In another position they are useful for resource intensive content production such as video editing. A 2-in-1 falls into both hybrid tablet and hybrid laptop categories. Those hybrids, which are combine the advantages of both are 2-in-1's. This example of technological convergence is intended to combine the mobility of a tablet with the power and versatility of a laptop. A tablet can easily be used without a table, and is primarily used for internet browsing and media consumption. A laptop allows easy content creation, but lacks the mobility of a tablet. A 2-in-1 is made to combine their advantages. The first 2-in-1's released were convertibles, Ultrabook-like laptops with the ability to hide the keyboard, rotating, folding or sliding it behind or within a chassis. After the inception of 2-in-1 convertibles, many manufacturers have looked for a way to further decrease the size and weight of their touchscreen-enabled hybrid laptop devices. 2-in-1 detachables emerged, devices with a detachable keyboard. When being considered a tablet, 2-in-1 falls in the category of a hybrid tablet, but distincts from other members of this group in the following ways: it runs a full-featured desktop operating system, such as Windows 10, a CPU which supports it, such as Intel Core or Intel Atom, and has I/O ports typically found on laptops, such as USB and DisplayPort. The most prominent distinctive part is a design of a keyboard, which transforms 2-in-1 into a full-fledged laptop. When a 2-in-1 is being classified as a laptop, it loosely falls in the Ultrabook device category, sharing with it such traits as a light and thin chassis, a power-efficient CPU and a long battery life. It is distinguished from a traditional Ultrabook by the inclusion of a touchscreen display and a concealable or detachable keyboard. Some devices using the ARM architecture share characteristics of 2-in-1s, such as now discontinued Microsoft's Surface RT, which has the same detachable keyboard as the Surface Pro and except for its processor and operating system is otherwise identical to it. These devices are not classified as 2-in-1's, because they run mobile operating system (iOS, Android, Windows RT) instead of a desktop OS (Windows 10, Ubuntu), and typically have less industry-standard I/O-ports. The first device which can be considered a 2-in-1 detachable is the Compaq TC1000 from 2002. It features a 1 GHz Transmeta Crusoe CPU, Nvidia GeForce 2 Go GPU, Windows XP Tablet PC edition, detachable keyboard and a stylus. The mainstream public attention was not achieved until the late 2013, when tablet-sized laptops with detachable keyboards, mainly running the Windows 8 operating system on Intel Atom processors, started to appear in the mass market. Among the first devices from this era were the Asus VivoTab series by Asus, with models with 10.1 inches (26 cm) or 11.6 inches (29 cm) screens. They began to arrive in stores in October 2012, and were succeeded by the ASUS Transformer Book series in October 2013. Microsoft started its own line of 2-in-1's with the introduction of the Surface Pro series, first device of which has been released in February 2013. It had a 10.6 inches (0.0134 ch) display, Intel Core i5 CPU, and a detachable keyboard, which also doubles as a protective screen cover. A number of prominent laptop manufacturers, such as Lenovo, Dell, Samsung, Acer and others released own versions of 2-in-1's. In April 2012 Apple's CEO Tim Cook, answering to the question of the researcher Anthony Sacconaghi about a possible hybrid of iPad and MacBook Air, compared a 2-in-1 to "a hybrid of a toaster and a refrigerator" that "doesnt please anyone": As of 2015, there are no other pre-installed operating system specifically supporting 2-in-1's, other than Microsoft Windows: 10 and 8.1. Although some Linux distributions do support some touch features of 2-in-1's, they are unsupported by the hardware vendors. Apple's OS X operating system does not support touch features, since there are no Apple touch-enabled devices, powered by OS X. A touch-oriented, tablet part of the Windows the apps and the whole ecosystem with the Windows Store in the center of it, is often criticized as a less convenient, less easy to use and offering a significantly lesser amount of quality apps, compared to more mature ecosystems of Google Android and Apple iOS mobile operating systems. However, it is possible to run Android apps in the Windows through the use of an emulator software, such as BlueStacks App Player or American Megatrends AMIDuOS. 