Lawrence Technological University (LTU), frequently referred to as Lawrence Tech, is a private university located in Southfield, Michigan, United States. Lawrence Tech was founded in 1932 in Highland Park as Lawrence Institute of Technology (LIT) by Russell E. Lawrence. The university moved to Southfield in 1955 and has since expanded to 102 acres (0.41 km2). The campus also includes the Frank Lloyd Wright-designed Affleck House and the Detroit Center for Design + Technology in Midtown Detroit. Lawrence Tech is considered one of the foremost private technological universities. The university has consistently been among the Top Tier for "UniversitiesMaster's (Midwest)" by U.S. News & World Report. Bloomberg-Businessweek also reported that the earning power of a Lawrence Tech bachelor's degree ranks in the highest 30 percent of all U.S. universities. Other distinctions include: Princeton Review "Best in the Midwest" in 2010; Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching recognition, 2009; G. I. Jobs "Military Friendly School," 2010; State of Michigan Center of Excellence for Sustainable Infrastructure and Structural Testing; an Intel "Top 50 Unwired Campus"; a Michigan Green Leader; Architectural Record among "America's Best Architectural Schools" in construction methods and materials; and Michigan's Going Green Award." The school offers undergraduate, masters, and doctoral programs in STEAM fields (science, technology, engineering, arts, and mathematics). The university's four colleges are Architecture and Design, Arts and Sciences, Engineering, and Management. LTU's athletic teams are known as the Blue Devils. They compete in Division II of the NAIA and joined the Wolverine Hoosier Athletic Conference in 2012. Russell Lawrence founded the college of engineering in the midst of the Great Depression and with only a few hundred students and a handful of faculty. It was a firm belief of Lawrence that education should focus not only on theory, but on the practical application. Classes were originally held in a building leased from Henry Ford adjacent to a huge manufacturing facility on Woodward Avenue. Ford built the Model T and perfected the moving assembly line in this location. "Theory and Practice" were ingrained side-by-side and helped prepare students for leadership in a new technical era. From the beginning, there were no restrictions on entering students relating to race, color, creed, or national or ethnic originonly the requirement that students qualify for admission and have the desire to succeed. Lawrence Tech provided the opportunity for working students to earn a baccalaureate degree by attending evening programs, day programs, or a combination of the twoa unique feature in 1932 and still true to this day. E. George Lawrence, Russell Lawrence's brother, became President in 1934 and helped usher tremendous growth of programs, including the move to a new location in Southfield. In 1935, the four-quarter academic calendar was developed. As enrollment grew, the University acquired acreage at the John C. Lodge Freeway and 10 Mile Road on what had been a General Mills research farm. In 1950, associate programs were added to Lawrence Tech's baccalaureate offerings. In 1952 the College of Management was created, having its origins in an earlier industrial engineering curriculum. In 1955, Lawrence Tech opened its first building on the Southfield Campus to house all of these programs. The College of Architecture and Design evolved in 1962 from the former architectural engineering department. Wayne H. Buell, who served as president from 1964 to 1977 and as chair of the board and chief executive officer until 1981, worked to build a firm foundation for the University's early emergence as a technological leader. He first advanced the notion that Lawrence Tech was a private college serving a public purpose. The College of Arts and Sciences was established under his watch in 1967. Richard E. Marburger, served as president from 1977 to 1993 and as chair of the board of trustees and chief executive officer. His presidency was marked by the addition of graduate degrees, the massive growth of computer facilities. In 1977, Lawrence Tech shed its "commuter" classification by opening the nine-story University Housing-South residence hall. The Frank Lloyd Wright-designed Affleck House in Bloomfield Hills was donated to the University in 1978. The Wayne H. Buell Management Building and the Don Ridler Field House were completed during his presidency. Numerous improvements to existing buildings, and a substantial increase in state-of-the-art laboratory and computer equipment were highlights of these years. Master's degree programs in management were launched in 1989, and in engineering in 1990. Simultaneously, LIT's change to its present name, Lawrence Technological University, was approved on January 1, 1989, by the State of Michigan, and more clearly described Lawrence Tech's undergraduate and graduate mission. Charles M. Chambers became president in 1993 and served as chancellor in 2006. During his presidency, he oversaw significant enhancement of the University's international reputation as a distinguished center of technological education and research. A Strategic Plan and Campus Master Plan were adopted to guide the University. Other achievements included construction of the University Technology and Learning Center, University Housing-North; the A. Alfred Taubman Student Services Center; a redeveloped campus quadrangle; the Center for Innovative Materials Research; establishment of a Faculty Senate; conversion of the computer system to a client server model with full Internet2 connectivity and online library access; creation of Michigan's first completely wireless laptop campus; and expanded bookstore, dining, and student activity facilities. Master of Architecture program was added in 1993, and graduate degree in Arts and Sciences in 1997. Doctoral programs were launched in 2002. The University Technology and Learning Center opened in 2001, University Housing-North in 2002, and the A. Alfred Taubman Student Services Center and the Center for Innovative Materials Research in 2006. Lewis N. Walker was named interim president in February 2006, became president on July 1, and was inaugurated on November 2, 2006. He had previously served as provost, the University's chief academic officer, and executive vice president. Walker was committed to developing the leadership skills of Lawrence Tech's students and worked with faculty to add a leadership component to the curricula of all undergraduate programs. In addition, he engaged in partnerships with universities worldwide that brought international students to campus and provided further opportunities for Lawrence Tech students to study abroad. Varsity athletics returned under his watch in 2011.Virinder K. Moudgil was named president in July 2012, and was inaugurated in September. He had previously served as Senior Vice President for Academic Affairs and Provost, Interim Provost, and Provost at Oakland University. In the fall of 2015, Lawrence Tech opened their third on-campus housing unit, Lloyd E. Reuss Residence Hall. Concurrently, there has been an enormous expansion and improvement of facilities, including the building of the A. Alfred Taubman Complex. For nearly 80 years, Lawrence Tech has continued to prosper and accelerate its growth, hone its educational philosophy of theory and practice, build important community and professional alliances, and forge partnerships with the firms, organizations, and industries who hire Lawrence Tech alumni. Today it offers over 100 programs in four colleges, with a total enrollment of nearly 4,500 students, and employs over 400 full- and part-time faculty. In terms of enrollment, Lawrence Tech is among Michigan's largest independent colleges. Just recently, the University received an anonymous cash donation for $20,000,000 which is the largest gift in its 81-year history. The donation will be used to support the STEM fields of science, technology, and mathematics by creating a Marburger STEM Center that supports those programs. A large portion of the donation will also go to need-based scholarships. Construction began at the start of the 2014 fall school year. Lawrence Tech has consistently been among the Top Tier for "UniversitiesMaster's (Midwest)" by U.S. News & World Report. Lawrence Technological University's ranking in the 2015 edition of Best Colleges is 54th in the category Regional Universities (Midwest). In addition, the University tied for 49th of 100 "Best Undergraduate Engineering Programs" in U.S. News & World Report's Best Universities-Masters-Midwest in 2010. Other distinctions include: Princeton Review "Best in the Midwest" in 2010; Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching recognition, 2009; G. I. Jobs "Military Friendly School," 2010; State of Michigan Center of Excellence for Sustainable Infrastructure and Structural Testing; an Intel "Top 50 Unwired Campus"; a Michigan Green Leader; Architectural Record among "America's Best Architectural Schools" in construction methods and materials; and Michigan's Going Green Award." Bloomberg-Businessweek also reported that the earning power of a Lawrence Tech bachelor's degree ranks in the highest 30 percent of all U.S. universities. 3,033 students are enrolled as of 2015, 76% male and 24% female. The acceptance rate for students (in 2014) is 57.6%. The college offers numerous undergraduate and graduate opportunities as outlined below. The college offers numerous undergraduate and graduate opportunities as outlined below. The college offers numerous undergraduate and graduate opportunities as outlined below. The college offers numerous undergraduate and graduate opportunities as outlined below. Lawrence Tech teams are known as the Blue Devils. The university is a member of the National Association of Intercollegiate Athletics (NAIA), primarily competing in the WolverineHoosier Athletic Conference (WHAC) while men's ice hockey team is a member of the American Collegiate Hockey Association (ACHA) at the Division III level as a member of the Michigan Collegiate Hockey Conference (MCHC). Men's sports include basketball, bowling, cross country, ice hockey, lacrosse and soccer; while women's sports include basketball, bowling, cross country, lacrosse, soccer and volleyball. Lawrence Tech fielded athletic teams throughout its history from 1930 to 1962. The 1950-51 men's basketball team played the 1951 National Invitation Tournament, held at Madison Square Garden in New York. Lawrence Tech was defeated by Dayton, 71-77 in the opening round of the tournament. Blaine Denning, an alumnus from the 1951 team, went on to play professional basketball with the Baltimore Bullets of the NBA. Lawrence Tech re-instated athletic programs in 2011 and joined the NAIA. Men's soccer and bowling, along with women's volleyball joined the already established men's ice hockey team for the university's athletic offerings during the 2011-12 academic year. During its fifth season in the NAIA the university will begin competition in men's baseball, basketball, bowling, cross country, golf, hockey, volleyball, lacrosse, soccer, tennis, and women's basketball, bowling, cross country, golf lacrosse, soccer, softball, tennis volleyball. On campus extracurricular activities include leadership opportunities and more than 40 clubs. Student Government represents all organizations on campus. The University is also home to chapters of fraternities, including Alpha Sigma Phi, Theta Tau, Sigma Pi, Sigma Phi Epsilon, Phi Kappa Upsilon, and Phi Beta Sigma. The sororities represented on campus include Chi Omega Rho, Delta Tau Sigma, Delta Phi Epsilon, and Kappa Beta Gamma. The following is a list the presents other notable alumni. Steven A. Ballmer, while still simultaneously enrolled in high school, participated in Lawrence Tech's Summer Science Institute, then spent a year at the University, excelling in six of Lawrence Tech's top mathematics classes. Ballmer is the former CEO of Microsoft and current owner of the NBA's Los Angeles Clippers. Bennie L. Benjamin, B.S. Civil Engineering 1955 retired director of the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department, which serves nearly half of Michigan's citizens and is one of the nation's largest water and waste treatment organizations John Buffone, B.S. Architecture 1974, B. Architecture 1975 Little Caesars Vice President of Architecture, oversaw design of Comerica Park. He managed a team of hundreds of architects, artists, and designers to develop the ballpark, which features a carousel, Ferris wheel, and 150-foot (46 m) wide fountain. Donald W. Date, B.S. Architectural Engineering 1949 The late chief architect for the United States' Panama Canal Co. His Canal improvements and modernizations significantly increased efficiency and tonnage transported through the Canal. John DeLorean, B.S. Industrial engineering 1948 Former GM executive who created the first muscle car and an American businessman who founded the De Lorean Motor Company based in Northern Ireland. Ed Donley, B.S. Mechanical Engineering 1943 Former president of Air Products & Chemicals and Lawrence Tech's largest benefactor, and former Chairman of the United States Chamber of Commerce in the 1980s. Alan Haase, B.S. Electrical Engineering 1982 President of AGC Aerospace & Defense Composites Group, accomplished turnaround expert in leading underperforming companies to produce profitable, sustainable growth. Elizabeth Howell, B.S. Electrical Engineering 1992 Vice President of Operations at ITC Holdings Corp., the nation's largest independent electricity transmission company. Miss Howell is a NERC certified system operator and is a board member of the Midwest Reliability Organization. Ronald Knockeart, B.S. Electrical Engineering 1963 inventor of the laser bar code scanner and pioneered keyless entry door locks on cars. John W. Laister, B.S. Aeronautical Engineering 1938 During World War II, developed the revolutionary high wing/rear door cargo plane design still used in cargo aircraft worldwide. Thomas S. Moore, B.S.EE 1986- general manager of Daimler-Chrysler's advanced vehicle research and development program, called Liberty and Technical Affairs. He oversees development of all future Chrysler products, working with a five to 10 year lead time. James P. Ryan, B.S. Architectural Engineering 1966 former owner and one time principal of one of the nation's leading architectural firms that specializes in commercial and shopping center development. Highly acclaimed designs include the Somerset Collection and Great Lakes Crossing malls. George W. Sierant, ME 1947 - engineered the first viable rear-facing child safety seat in 1966. The six-way seat adjuster was another of many driver comfort and safety innovations Sierant developed during his 34 years with General Motors. Alfred Taubman, former Lawrence Tech architecture student one of the nation's leading real estate developers, innovators, and owners of shopping malls throughout the U.S. He also owns Sotheby's auctioneers and until recently owned the A&W restaurant chain. Lewis Veraldi, B.S. Mechanical Engineering 1968 late father of the original Ford Taurus and Sable. As Ford Motor Company vice president in charge of car development, Veraldi pioneered cross-disciplinary personnel teams that led to the launch of these cars. The "team" development process he innovated has become the industry standard. Vincent G. Dow, B.S. Electrical Engineering 1979 - Vice President and Chief Engineer of Electric Distribution Operations at DTE Energy. Oversees DTE's electrical system, including new customer connections, engineering, power plant electrical equipment, and all distribution system construction. Also oversees Ass Optimization, distribution contract management, performance management, the Smart Grid efforts and NERC standards and compliance for DTE. Wayne Buell, B.S. Chemical Engineering 1936 Lawrence Tech's president in 1964 Was a member of the first class to attend Lawrence Tech for four years from 19321936. The Buell Management building was named in his honor. Don Ridler Before coming to Lawrence Tech in 1932 to build an athletic program, he coached Michigan's first professional football franchise. The Ridler Field House was named in his honor. 