Linda P.B. Katehi-Tseregounis (born January 30, 1954) is a Greek-American engineer and university administrator. Since 2009, she has served as the sixth chancellor of the University of California, Davis. Katehi was born in Athens and grew up on Salamis Island in Greece. After graduating from high school, Katehi was admitted to the National Technical University of Athens, which she was able to attend because it did not charge tuition at the time. In 1977, Katehi was the first female from Salamis to graduate from college and she did so with a degree in electrical engineering. Katehi was one of the two women in her class of 189 students and has stated that this lead to many difficulties and biases against her during that time. Since then, Katehi has stated that these difficulties and biases motivated her to mentor women and other underrepresented minorities pursuing careers in engineering and the sciences. Katehi has stated that she was drawn to electrical engineering as a teenager in 1969, when she watched Neil Armstrongs Apollo 11 Moon landing while at a neighbors home. She went on to say that, while captivated by the astronauts, she was most captivated by the engineers back in the Mission Control on Earth. Katehi has also publicly shared her experience of being a student at the National Technical University during the student uprisings against the Greek dictatorial regime that was violently crushed by a combined military and police force on Nov. 17, 1973. After two years working as a researcher at the Ministry of National Defenses Naval Research Lab in Athens, a future mentor encouraged her to apply to graduate school at University of California, Los Angeles and she came to the United States in 1979. She went on to earn her master's degree and doctorate in electrical engineering at UCLAs Henry Samueli School of Engineering and Applied Sciences in 1981 and 1984, respectively. While still living in Greece, Katehi began her teaching career as a lecturer. She taught at the National Technical University of Athens Greece between 1977 and 1978. She then became a researcher at the Ministry of National Defence's Naval Research Lab in Athens, Greece. In her early career, Katehi worked at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor from 1984 to 2001 as a professor of electrical engineering and computer science, and as associate dean of academic affairs and graduate education starting in 1994. She was hired as the engineering dean at Purdue University in 2002. While there, she increased both the faculty by 15% and research funding within the engineering department. In 2005, Katehi became the first female provost and vice-chancellor of the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. After four years at the University of Illinois, Katehi became the 6th Chancellor of the University of California, Davis in 2009, succeeding Larry Vanderhoef. She is the first female chancellor of the university. Katehis expertise is in circuit design and her research focuses on antennas. She currently holds 19 patents. Through her academic roles she has been a mentor to over 70 postdoctoral fellows. In addition to her university roles, Katehi was appointed by President George W. Bush to the Committee on the National Medal of Science. She chaired the 12-member committee, along with the Secretary of Commerces committee for the National Medal of Technology and Innovation, until 2010. She was appointed to the FBIs National Security Higher Education Advisory Board in 2010. Katehi is a fellow of the American Association for the Advancement of Science and in 2011, she was elected to the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. She is also a member of the National Academy of Engineering where she chaired the committee on K-12 engineering education for two years. For her academic work, she has received awards including the AHC Aristeio Award in Academics in 2011 and a Gabby Award for her achievements in education and academia, also in 2011. In 2014, she received an honorary degree from the American College of Greece as part of their annual commencement ceremony. On October 4, 2015 The National Academy of Engineering presented Linda Katehi with its Simon Ramo Founders Award recognizing her extraordinary impact on the engineering profession and leadership in engineering research and education. Member of the Board of John Wiley & Sons Member of the Board of the Committee on Institutional Cooperation Member of the Board of The Cyprus Institute Member of the Board of Valley Vision Member of the Board of the Bay Area Council Economic Institute Member of the Board of the Business Higher Education Forum Before coming to UC Davis, Katehi served as provost and vice chancellor for academic affairs at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign from April 1, 2006 to June 2009. As the Provost she oversaw all Colleges and Schools, the Library, HR, IT, facilities and was in charge of the University budget. She oversaw the admissions for UIUC during part of the time period (2003-2009) that came to be investigated under of the University of Illinois clout scandal. Katehi denied involvement, saying the "Category I" decisions were made at higher administrative levels. That was also confirmed by the findings as described in the report published by the investigative committee. Katehi was appointed chancellor by the University of California Board of Regents on May 7, 2009, effective August 17, 2009. She holds UC Davis faculty appointments in electrical and computer engineering and in women and gender studies. Katehi charged a committee with creating a new "Vision of Excellence" for the school. She also launched several blue ribbon committees: tech transfer and commercialization, research, information technology excellence, and organizational excellence. Katehi also created the Chancellor's Colloquium Distinguished Speaker Series to bring together distinguished scholars and government leaders who promise intellectual spark and enriching engagement with our academic community As of 2009, Katehi's base annual salary was $400,000. In response to acts of hate and intolerance on campus in 2010, Katehi launched the Hate-Free Campus Initiative to reaffirm the campuss values and commitment to one another. The initiative included creation of "Beyond Tolerance Tuesday," collaboration with the Museum of Tolerance, and the creation of a speakers series and the Civility Project, which began with a grant from the National Endowment for the Humanities. Under Katehi's leadership, UC Davis co-hosted the Governors' Global Climate Summit 3: Building the Green Economy in November 2010. Participants included Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger, the United Nations Development Programme, and the United Nations Environment Programme. The summits focus was to continue to build subnational collaboration on policies and strategies to stimulate economic growth, reduce dependence on fossil fuels, create green jobs, promote clean energy solutions and reduce greenhouse gas pollution. In 2013, Katehi launched the UC Davis World Food Center, with the publicly stated goal of amplifying UC Davis' numerous programs involved in food, health and sustainability. In January 2015, she announced that UC Davis plans to build a new location for the The World Food Center in downtown Sacramento. The location could also serve as a satellite campus for UC Davis. Katehi stated that a plan for the new location could be formed by the end of May or June. In September 2014, Katehi announced a partnership between Mars, Incorporated and UC Davis to create the Innovation Institute for Food and Health. According to Katehi, the institute will serve as the innovation branch of the UC David World Food Center. Chief Science Officer at Mars Inc., Harold Schmitz, called the relationship both research and innovation-based. Mars has pledged to contribute 40 million dollars to the project over 10 years while UC Davis has committed to contribute 20 million dollars over 10 years. Additionally, Katehi announced a partnership with a government agency in Chile to expand research on a global level in conjunction with the UC Davis World Food Center. Days after the announcement of the Mars partnership, Katehi and UC Davis announced that it will install a solar array on 70 acres of land stouh of Interstate 80. The power plant will provide 14 percent of all UC Davis's power consumption. The array will be built in conjunction with SunPower who previously built a 4-megawatt solar array at the UC Davis West Village neighborhood, which is a net-zero community. Increasing the percentage of Latino students at UC Davis is a goal of the university, as stated by Katehi. UC Davis aims to become a Hispanic Serving Institution by having at least 25% of their undergraduate student body made up of Latinos by the 2018-2019 school year. In March, Katehi invited the public to participate in the construction of the Shrem Museum in UC Davis's Gateway District. Participants were invited to sign a steel beam that would be installed and visible after construction. Upon completion, the museum will house the UC Davis art collection which consists of over 5,000 items. In August 2011, Katehi voiced her support of the California STEM Learning Network in her Huffington Post blog. The California STEM Learning Network, otherwise known as CLSNet, was starting in 2008 by funding provided by the S.D. Bechtel Jr. Foundation and the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation. CLSNet promotes the importance of STEM fields as well as pushes to increase the number of students graduating high school with the intent to go into STEM fields in the state of California. In September 2012, Katehi was awarded a $3.725 million grant over 5 years from the National Science Foundation to establish an ADVANCE program at UC Davis, with the goal of increasing female participation in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) education and careers. Katehi serves as the principal investigator and chairs the project's steering committee. According to UC Davis, the grant money will be used, in part, to create the Center for the Advancement of Multicultural Perspectives on Science (CAMPOS). The CAMPOS initiatives primary focus is increasing cultural diversity and supporting Latinas in STEM careers. In October 2012, Katehi was included on the California STEM Learning Networks list of twelve "Leading Women in STEM." The Network recognized Katehi for her work in increasing STEM opportunities for women and girls and serving as a role model in the field. In March 2013, Katehi was chosen to speak at the 26th annual Yolo County Women's History Month luncheon. Katehi also gave a keynote address about her work in STEM at the Consortium for Women and Researchs annual Distinguished Women in Science Lecture Series in April 2013. On November 18, 2011, Katehi requested Occupy movement protesters on the UC Davis campus remove their tents from the quad. When a group of non-compliant protestors refused to move, campus police officers pepper sprayed them. Eleven protesters received medical treatment; two were hospitalized. Katehi stated there had been "no option" except police action due to health and safety concerns, participation of some non-UC Davis persons in the protests, and some protestors' non-compliance with Katehi's earlier written and police's oral directions. The incident led to further protests and calls for Katehi's resignation from some campus departments and organizations. UC Davis Academic Senate Chair Linda Bisson criticized Katehi's slow response in providing information and taking disciplinary action against police, but she said most faculty wanted Katehi to stay in her post while being held accountable in some way. Katehi said she took "full responsibility for the incident" and placed two officers and the chief of campus police on administrative leave. Katehi stated that she would not step down, and she and State Assembly Speaker John A. Prez requested an outside investigation. Mark G. Yudof appointed former Los Angeles Police Department Chief William J. Bratton to head the investigation. The Reynoso Task Force Report published in April 2012 reported that Katehi "failed to express in any meaningful way her expectation that the police operation was to be sharply limited so that no use of force would be employed by police officers other than their demand that the tents be taken down." On July 31, 2012, a UC Davis spokesman announced that Lt. John Pike, a police officer who pepper-sprayed students, was no longer employed by the university. 