Line 8 is a north-south line of the Shanghai Metro network. It runs from Shiguang Road Station, in Yangpu District to Shendu Highway Station, in Minhang and there are also plans for the line to be extended to Luhui in Minhang District. The line is colored blue on system maps. Shiguang Road Shendu Highway Shiguang Road Oriental Sports Center Hongkou Football Stadium - At this virtual interchange station, passengers can transfer to Line 3. Previously they must exit and re-enter the station. Now a new linkway has been built via the shopping center. People's Square - Passengers can interchange to Lines 1 and 2. This is also a very important station, as it is located at a major financial district as well as near many tourist attractions. Xizang South Road: The first platform to platform interchange station in the Shanghai Metro network. Interchange with Line 4. The subway line's first phase, which opened on December 29, 2007, runs between Shiguang Road and Yaohua Road, excluding Zhoujiadu Station. Trial operation began for the first phase of this line on September 16. The second phase, from Yaohua Road to Shendu Highway, excluding Oriental Sports Center Station, began its trial runs on July 5, 2009. Oriental Sports Center Station opened in April 2011; Zhoujiadu Station is planned to open in 2012. The third phase will extend Line 8 south from Shendu Highway Station to Huizhen Road and will be 6.2 km long. It could possibly use rubber tire technology. Even though line 8 is a heavy rail rapid transit line, "C size" trains used for light metro lines consisting of 6 or 7 cars are being used throughout the line with platforms built to accommodate up to 8 car trains. Due to the trains relatively small size and capacity compared to "A size" trains used on other Shanghai Metro lines the line is extremely crowded. This has caused much doubt among the public in the Shanghai Metro's ability to accurately predict passenger flows for future lines. It was revealed that line 8 originally was forecasted to have a short term daily ridership of 400,000-500,000 people/day, which warrants the use of "A size" trains. This is not surprising given Line 8 is planned to pass by some of Shanghai's densest neighborhoods and several major attractions. However the forecast was downgraded to 200,000 people/day which allowed Shanghai Alstom, a company interested in manufacturing and selling "C size" trains in Shanghai, to build trains for line 8. There are no short term solutions to the overcrowding. The loading gauges of "A size" trains are incompatible with "C size" trains but parallel relief bus services have started operating. 