This is a list of alien races from Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles. The Antarians hate violence and appear in the "Invasion of the Turtle Snatchers" episode of the 1987 cartoon, when a family from a planet orbiting Antares travels to the Earth. The family members are named Klaatu, Barada, & Nikto (a nod to the famous phrase from The Day the Earth Stood Still). The Federation is a militant civilization including aliens identical to humans whose galactic empire spans many planets. In the 2003 animated series they are the arch-foes of the Triceratons under Prime Leader Zanramon, with General Blanque leading them in the conflict. Their attempts to destroy their enemies led them to pursue Professor Honeycutt, a former Federation scientist whose mind was transferred into a robotic body due to an accident. The Federation attempted to exploit Honeycutt's Teleportal invention, but were thwarted by the attempts of the Triceratons to do likewise and the unexpected arrival of the Turtles. They later pursued Honeycutt and the Triceratons to Earth in an effort to capture Honeycutt, only for a virus created by the Professor to render their fleet helpless. Aid from the reorganized Triceraton Republic led to peace between the two factions. The Kraang are a species of aliens that appear in the 2012 TV series, which are an homage to both Krang and the Utroms. Like the untroms, they can have human disguises, however, they are all identical. They are one of the main antagonists of the series. The Kraang's voices are provided by Nolan North, with at least one female Kraangdriod voiced by Cassandra Peterson. Not unlike the Utroms in the Mirage comics and 2003 TV Series, they are portrayed as a race of brain-shaped aliens from Dimension X that pilot robotic bodies who were responsible for bringing the mutagen that was responsible for the Turtle's mutations to Earth. Their history became intertwined with the Turtles when they caught Splinter spying on them and attacked him while he was holding the not-yet-mutated Turtles, causing them to mutate when one of the Kraang accidentally dropped a mutagen canister on them. When the mutated turtles went to the surface world 15 years later in "Rise of the Turtles," they came face-to-face again with the Kraang when they were about to kidnap April O'Neil and her psychologist father, Kirby, with the help of their getaway driver, Snake. After a failed attempt due to a lack of chemistry, the Turtles invaded the Kraang base, mutated Snake into a 12 ft. regenerating mutant ivy weed dubbed "Snakeweed" by Michelangelo, and rescued April, but failed to save her father. In "Monkey Brains," the Kraang were mentioned to have assigned Dr. Victor Falco to create a neuro-chemical involving mutagen and chimpanzee DNA. As a despicable measure, Falco tested the chemical on his colleague Dr. Tyler Rockwell, mutating him into a humanoid mutant chimpanzee that can read emotions, but the Turtles stopped him from extracting it. In "The Gauntlet," the Kraang have planted a mutagen bomb on the roof Wolf Hotel, but the Turtles were secretly warned about this plot through a message from the still-imprisoned Kirby O'Neil meant for April that was delivered by Pete the Pigeon. While trying to free Kirby, they learned from him that the Kraang have been abducting scientists so that they can help modify the mutagen's properties. Since the physical laws of Dimension X are different, the mutagen has different effects in this dimension. The bomb was defused by the Turtles during their fight at the hotel with both the Kraang and the Foot Clan. In "It Came from the Depths," it was revealed that the Kraang travel between Dimension X and Earth using a portal in their headquarters that's power cell was stolen by Leatherhead six months prior. When the came to him demanding the cell's current hiding place, he entrusted it to the Turtles and dealt with the Kraang to buy them time to escape. In "The Alien Agenda," the Kraang established the World Wide Genome Project as a front to collect the DNA of every animal and plant species on Earth. This was project was destroyed when Karai helped the Turtles with disgracing the DNA collection by creating a composite monster that Michelangelo named Justin. In "The Pulverizer," the Kraang reclaimed the power cell that Leatherhead stole from them. In "TCRI," it was revealed that the Kraang have their headquarters in the higher parts of the TCRI building and that they can only survive in poisonous gas. While inside the TCRI building, the Turtles discover the Kraang's invasion plan: To mutate the whole planet so that their kind can live here, which will wipe out everyone else in the process. The Kraang even brought Traag from Dimension X to attack the Turtles until it was dragged back into Dimension X by Leatherhead. When the Turtles got away when their explosives were unable to destroy the Kraang's portal, Michelangelo managed to obtain a Kraang data storage device which revealed that since Kirby is a psychologist, his area of expertise had nothing to do with the mutagen's modification: the Kraang intended target was actually April. In "Cockroach Terminator," the Kraang stole a special lens as part of a plot to use their laser drill to burrow to the Earth's core as part of the Kraang's invasion plan. This plot was thwarted by Raphael while he was overcoming his fear of cockroaches. In "Enemy of My Enemy," two Kraang operatives piloted a spacecraft as a means of hunting the Turtles up to the point where they ended up crashing a weapons trade involving the Shredder. This spacecraft was eventually repelled by Leonardo and one of the pilots was captured by Shredder. In "Karai's Vendetta," the captured Kraang was interrogated by Shredder on why they hunt the Turtles and told him on how they've been targeting April, who Shredder then sent Karai after to lure the Turtles out of hiding. Meanwhile, the rest of the Kraang had set up a base in the East River where they started a plot to turn Earth's water into Kraang water (which can dissolve a pizza yet not harm humans, or perhaps it just has no effect on April, hence the Kraang's interest in her) and brought a large unnamed sea monster from Dimension X to help guard it. The Turtles managed to destroy the base and escape from the sea monster. We do not know if it can harm humans or not as April is the one who the Kraang water splashed on and the Kraang want April for a special reason. In "The Pulverizer Returns," the Foot Clan began to steal mutagen from TCRI as part of Shredder's plan to create a mutant army. The captured Kraang tried to warn Shredder about how dangerous the mutagen is, but Shredder wouldn't listen and tried to go through with his plan. When the Turtles foiled it, Shredder and the captured Kraang agreed to say that they have a common enemy, foreshadowing a team-up between the villains. In "Operation: Break Out," it was shown that Shredder and the Kraang were working together, and that they engineered Kirby O'Neil's "escape" with the aid of the Turtles. The Kraang were also shown to have created a mutant hunter known as the Newtralizer, who proved to be beyond their control when it savagely attacked them after escaping his cell in the same holding facility where Kirby was held prisoner in. April, meanwhile, was led by her strange mind to discover one of the Kraang's devices, a Communication Orb, and bringing it back to the lair. In "Booyaka-Showdown," it was revealed that they have planted a mind control device on Kirby, which they use to force him to capture April and deliver her to Shredder, who uses her as bait to lure out Splinter. Having accomplished this, Shredder turned April over to the Kraang, who proceeded to use their portal to Dimension X to bring the Technodrone to Earth, though the Turtles subsequently succeeded in destroying the TCRI building. The Kraang's leader, Kraang Prime (voiced by Roseanne Barr), was eventually able to get the Technodrome out of the portal before then, starting the invasion on New York, and needed April's help with the terraforming process through her unique mental energies. However, the Turtles interfered in this plan, and the Technodrone was subsequently brought down off the coast of New York City, though it was revealed to be intact and partially active. The Kraang continue to pose a threat throughout the second season, briefly maintaining an alliance with the Foot in which they provided them with robotic Foot ninja and attempt to provide them with mutagen so that they can create mutants to destroy the Turtles. However, their partnership was dissolved after a number of incidents, such as the Kraang setting up the Turtles to accidentally intercept a load of mutagen, which was subsequently scattered over the city, and programming their ultimate robot Foot ninja creation, Chrome Dome, to defy Karai's orders to kill April, as the Kraang still wished to capture her. In "The Kraang Conspiacy," it was subsequently revealed by a private investigator, Jack Kurtzman, who had been investigating the disappearances of Kirby O'Neil and the other scientists who the Kraang had kidnapped, that this is because the Kraang have been preparing to terraform Earth for centuries, altering human DNA until they could create a perfect human-Kraang hybrid: April. In their efforts to utilize her, the Kraang created a number of clones of April, including a misshapen failure dubbed "April Derp" by Michelangelo; all these clones are subsequently destroyed when April released a physic blast. In "Metalhead Rewired," the Kraang initiated a plot to capture the various mutants inhabiting New York and enslave them with special control devices. They succeeded in rounding up a number of mutants and imprisoning them in a facility in a pocket dimension, but the location was discovered by Metalhead and the Turtles. They briefly used Snakeweed and Spider Bytez against the Turtles, but Metalhead freed them and the other mutants, who escaped back to New York along with the Turtles. In "The Manhattan Project," the Turtles were focused on a Kraang plot in which the Kraang brought giant worm creatures known as Kraathatrogons to New York from Dimension X. These creatures were revealed to be the source of the mutagen, which they secrete and can be milked of, and also served as mounts for the Kraang. When the Turtles attempted to thwart their plans, they and the Kraang end up battling beneath New York and in the Kraang's interdimensional portal network. In the end, the Turtles are able to send the Kraathatrogons back into the portal network, with one of them ending up in the universe of the 1987 Ninja Turtles cartoon. This mentioned Kraathatrogon was seen briefly seen in the 2012 universe swallowing Tiger Claw, a 6 and 1/2 ft. humanoid mutant Bengal tiger who, as a human child, was the subject of one of the Kraang's experiments in Japan uncounted years back and was recently trained into the Foot Clan as Shredder's new second-in-command. In "Newtrailzed," the Kraang began mass production of a new vehicle at the docks: The Kraang Walker. Unfortunately for them, this vehicle was hijacked by the Newtralizer with the help of Slash, but Slash was shown the error of his ways and helped the Turtles and Casey Jones stop the mad amphibian from using the walker from eradicating both the Kraang and the city's human population. In "Into Dimension X," the Kraang have finally perfected the mutagen, but the Turtles were secretly warned about this success by Leatherhead through the Kraang Communication Orb. After finding their way into Dimension X and traveling to the Kraang's home fortress, which was being guarded by Traag and Granitor, the Turtles rescued Leatherhead and helped him stop the Kraang from dumping the perfected mutagen into Earth's dimension through multiple portals. In "The Invasion," the Foot Clan finally made a full alliance with the Kraang to draw out and destroy the Turtles in exchange in helping them invade the city, which the Kraang did through various spies; the character Irma Langenstein was discovered to be the robotic housing of one such spy named Kraang Sub-Prime (voiced by Gilbert Gottfried), who was eventually defeated by Splinter. Having perfected the mutagen in a previous episode, they began using it to "Kraang-form" New York, turning humans and their environs into creatures and structures reminiscent of Dimension X. The Turtles, Leatherhead, Splinter, April, and Casey briefly attempted to fight them off, but despite the aid of the new Turtle-Mech created by Donatello they were forced to retreat after a battle with Kraang Prime. Kraang Prime also claimed that the Kraang were responsible for the existence of humanity, who supposedly developed after the Kraang exposed monkeys to mutagen. In "Buried Secrets," the Turtles, April and Casey discovered a Kraang ship beneath April's family farmhouse, where her great-grandfather supposedly discovered it and the Kraang inside, leading to generations of experimentation on the deceased relatives on April's mothers side of the O'Neil family until culminating in experiments they performed on her mother. They also discovered a clone of April's mother who was sealed within the ship due to being unstable, and managed to defeat her. In "Return to New York," the Turtles returned to find the city under the control of the Kraang, with all humans-including the Earth Protection Force-being either mutated or fitted with mind control devices. In "Battle for New York," the Turtles's confrontation with the Kraang for the city occurred when they are unexpectedly joined by the Mighty Mutanimals, a rebel team of mutants . The two teams manage to thwart a Kraang plot to launch a mutagen missile, and then launch an attack on the Kraang portal so that the Turtles can infiltrate Dimension X and cure and free the mutated humans. This leads them to another confrontation with Kraang Sub-Prime, who follows the Turtles to Dimension X while the Mutanimals fight to capture and hold the portal. After battling Kraang forces on both sides of the gateway, the two groups of mutants succeed in teleporting the cured humans back to Earth while sending the Kraang back to Dimension X, putting a halt to the invasion for the time being. The Malignoids area a race of vicious insect-like aliens that appear in the Archie Comics. They have tried to take over Earth many times only to be stopped by the Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles and the Mighty Mutanimals. The Neutrinos appear in the 1987 cartoon, Archie Comics, IDW comics and the video game Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles: Tournament Fighters, and are peace-loving humanoid aliens from Dimension X, who travel by flying craft looking much like 1950s and '60s American automobiles. Polarisoids appear in the "Camera Bugged" and "Welcome Back, Polarisoids" episodes of the 1987 cartoon, when a family from a planet orbiting Polaris travels to the Earth. Their camera is able to shrink people and objects and teleport them inside the camera. The family members's names are Frip, Millimeter, F-Stop & Say Cheese The Rock Soldiers (often called Stone Warriors, Stone Soldiers, or Rock Warriors) are an alien army of sentient humanoids from Dimension X whose bodies are composed of stone and are under the command of Krang. In the 1987 cartoon, the Rock Soldiers come from Dimension X and are not natural beings. As noted in the episode "Michelangelo's Birthday", the Rock Soldiers were created by Krang through use of his mutagen on rocks, a rare example of a non-living creature being animated by the chemical and bred as soldiers for his army. They are incredibly strong and resistant to physical injury, but not terribly bright. Accordingly, the Rock Soldiers entire "culture" is geared towards war and conflict with a definite tendency towards aggression and hostility in regards to other species. Their numbers are organized into a strict hierarchy, with power/prestige directly linked to military rank. The current commander of the Stone Warrior legions is General Traag and his second-in-command is Lieutenant Granitor. At present, the Stone Warriors serve the exiled alien warlord, Krang. There are two basic types of Rock Soldiers, brown and grey variations. In the Archie Comics version, the Rock Soldiers appear in the issues that adapted the episodes Hot Rodding Teenagers from Dimension X, Shredder & Splintered, and Return of the Shredder. In the IDW Comics, the Stone Soldiers are a genetic development of Baxter Stockman who had the mutagen required for them made by Krangs orders. The Soldiers who undermine the transformation process come from the ranks of Krangs humanoid army from Dimension X where they were given rock-like skin. In the 2012 series, Traag and Grantior are so far the only Rock Soldiers seen so far and are shown to be 20 ft. tall. General Traag is the leader of Krang's loyal Rock Soldiers from Dimension X. In the 1987 cartoon, Traag (voiced by Peter Renaday) came following the Neutrinos through the dimensional portal. After a small skirmish with the turtles, the Neutrinos teamed up with them and Michelangelo and Donatello sent both Traag and Lieutenant Granitor back through the portal and to their own dimension. He appeared in Archie Comics arcade game, and Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles II: Back from the Sewers. In the IDW comics, he is called "Captain Tragg" and helped Krang in trying to conquer the home planet of the Neutrinos and completely escaped after the battle in which the END rocket from Professor Honeycutt put all of the weapons of Krang's forces out of action. In the 2012 cartoon, Traag is a 20 ft lava-spewing rock monster with regenerating abilities, who is in service to the Kraang. He first appeared in "TCRI," where he was brought by the Kraang through a portal that connected TCRI to Dimension X. He proved to be a challenge to the Turtles, so Leatherhead ended up dragging him through the portal back to Dimension X. In "Showdown," Traag was seen guarding the portal when the Kraang upgraded it with a force field. When the Turtles tried to destroy it, they drew the attention of him and the Kraang, so Leonardo used the laser to disintegrate Traag. In "Into Dimension X," Traag teamed up with Granitor to attack the Turtles near the Kraang's facility in Dimension X. However, they were both defeated by Michelangelo in his "savage" suit when he used his voice to break apart the part of the cliff both rock monsters were on. Lieutenant Granitor is General Traag's right-hand man, and one of Krang's loyal Rock Soldiers from Dimension X. In the 1987 cartoon, Granitor (voiced by Pat Fraley) came following the Neutrinos through the dimensional portal. After a small skirmish with the turtles, the Neutrinos teamed up with them and Michelangelo and Donatello sent both Granitor and General Tragg back through the portal and to their own dimension. He appeared in the arcade game, and Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles II: Back from the Sewers. In the IDW comics, he is called "Sergeant Granitor" and commanded an assault on a Neutrino resistance bunker, to capture the Fugitoid and bring him back to Krang. Due to Granitor's command, the Neutrino bunker was destroyed and many innocent Neutrinos killed along with Fugitoid's family. Later on he and several other Rock Soldiers was searching the demolished base for Fugitoid. Granitor realized that the Fugitoid was in fact Honeycutt and chased him trough a portal to Earth. However, the Fugitoid used his morphing abilities to shapeshift himself into human form and get lost in the crowd. In the 2012 cartoon, Granitor is a 20 ft blue fire-spewing rock monster with regenerating abilities, who resembles Traag (but is pale-pink in color) and is in service to the Kraang. He first appeared in "Into Dimension X," where he teamed up with Traag to attack the Turtles near the Kraang's facility in Dimension X. However, they were both defeated by Michelangelo in his "savage" suit when he used his voice to break apart the part of the cliff both rock monsters were on. Sons of Silence is a group of aliens in the Archie Comics. Triceratons refers to the alien race that resemble anthropomorphic Triceratops. The Triceratons are depicted as rivals of the Federation. They are recurring characters in the Mirage comics The Triceratons appear in only one episode of the 1987 animated series, "Night of the Dark Turtle", and are not seen again. They also appear in various video games. The Triceratons were featured in the 2003 animated series as a race that desires galactic conquest. They have advanced technology, a strong government, and gladiatorial battles. Due to the Triceratons' hostility towards humans, Earth attempts a nuclear attack on their planet. There are many notable Triceraton figures in the series. In the Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles TV series, a individual Triceraton is briefly seen in Tiger Claw's flashback in the episode "The Wrath of the Tiger Claw." In the Season 3 finale, "Annihilation: Earth," the Triceraton Empire launches an invasion of Earth to not only wipe out the Kraang, but the entire planet as well. Though the Turtles put up a valiant effort, it's Shredder's personal revenge that ensures the Triceratons are victorious and the Earth is destroyed. In Season 4, the Turtles are given a second chance by the Fugitoid to prevent Earth's destruction by the Triceratons. Commander Mozar is a military commander of the Triceraton Republic in the Mirage comics and 2003 series. In the 2003 series Mozar is the counterpart of General Blanque when it comes to military matters. Mozar is the dedicated right hand of Zanramon, the Triceraton Prime Leader. He led the mission into territory controlled by the Federation of D'Hoonib, seeking to capture Professor Honeycutt. He succeeded, thanks to help from Blanque's private aid. However, he also captured the Turtles in the bargain. In the third season of the 2003 series, during the massive Triceraton invasion of Earth, Mozar begins to resent Zanramon's tyranny and bloodlust, as he refuses to fire on a disabled Federation fleet and is visibily disturbed when he is ordered to leave a squadron of their troops to fend for themselves in order to save the homeworld from Honeycutt's virus. When the rebel leader Traximus arrives to depose Zanramon, Mozar holds no objection and gladly orders his troops to stand down as his leader is overthrown. He remains a right hand to Traximus after Zanramon's fall from power. Mozar appears in the 2012 Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles series, voiced by Michael Dorn. Traximus was a noble warrior of the Triceraton Republic who believed that its old virtues should be restored in the 2003 series and the video game Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles 2: Battle Nexus. He spoke to the council and, at the orders of the tyrannical Zanramon, found himself in the dungeons with warriors taking part in "The Games". He was left to rot in his despair until he was bested by Leonardo, who spared his life with honor. Inspired by this act of kindness, Traximus regains hope that the current dictatorship can be overthrown, and leads the other gladiators to freedom in the midst of the chaos surrounding the Turtles' escape. He participates in the Battle Nexus tournament, though only to court more warriors to aid him in his cause. He is eliminated from the tournament by Raphael, but the two work together to free the imprisoned Splinter from the Daimyo's son, and Traximus is ultimately the one who saved the protagonists from falling into a rift in time and space when he anchors his axe into the ground and holds onto them all. In the third season, as the Triceratons invade Earth, Traximus has recruited a larger following after the Battle Nexus, and he aids the Turtles in rescuing the captured Donatello. At the end of the six-part story arc, Traximus has finally overthrown Zanramon and declares the war with the Federation to be over, expressing his wish for a new age of peace and honor to begin, with no further absolute rulers as Zanramon was. Zanramon is the Prime Leader Zanramon of the Triceraton Republic led the war against the Federation of D'Hoonib in the Mirage comic book and in the second Ninja Turtles animated series. Zanramon first appears in TMNT (vol. 1) #6, where he captures the turtles and Professor Honeycutt, wishing to acquire Fugitoid's teleporting technology for the Republic's use. The turtles' captivity is short-lived, however, as they manage not only to free themselves and the Fugitoid but to take Zanramon hostage as well. While making their escape, Zanramon is accidentally shot by his own guards and presumed dead by the turtles. Zanramon is not heard of again until TMNT (vol. 4) #28, where Michelangelo is informed that Zanramon had survived, and was no longer Prime Leader of the Triceratons: after the Fugitoid's escape, the then-leader lost political capital, and he was quickly deposed by opposing factions. In the 2003 series, when Professor Honeycutt was brought to him, he offers the robot full civil rights and privileges of a Triceraton citizen, but eventually resorts to forcing Honeycutt to build his teleporter lest he execute the Turtles. However, the Turtles survive both the Triceraton prison and the gladiatorial arena, and take the prime leader hostage, culminating in the theft of his personal space cruiser. When Honeycutt is traced to Earth months later, Zanramon orders a full-scale invasion on the planet. Zanramon demands they turn over the Professor or the Earth is destroyed - also revealing Donatello to the entire world (though this thankfully has no lasting effects on the Turtles' secrecy). Humanity ultimately loses the battle with the Triceratons, when even the Justice Force and nuclear weapons can't turn the tide. The Turtles return, rescue Donatello, and once again steal Zanramon's cruiser, to his rage. When Donatello is able to convince him that the Professor is not on Earth, Zanramon orders a retreat, only to deploy his forces yet again when the Professor finally appears on Earth. To Commander Mozar's disgust, Zanramon exhibits increasing amounts of ruthlessness, even to the point of abandoning a squadron of their own scouts. When Traximus and his rebels arrive Zanramon is immediately dethroned by Traximus, and is forced to occupy a cell facing his nemesis, former Federation leader Blanque. In the Mirage comics, Zog was one of two Triceraton soldiers left on Earth when the Utroms left. Some time later, Raphael found him in the sewers, and the Turtles used him to aid in their attack on the Foot. His mind was almost nothing, often laughing and priding himself on "knowing all." He mistook the Turtles for leaders of a Triceraton invasion and referred to Raphael as commander Zoraph. Having sustained substantial damage by a number of Foot ninja, he was eventually killed by the three mutated Shredder clones when he charged too far ahead of the team. In the 2003 series, Zog was one of the Triceratons teleported to Earth mid-battle with the Federation over Honeycutt's teleporter. However, while the other Federation and Triceraton forces are returned home by the Utroms, Zog became lost in the sewers, and was found by the Turtles choking to death from lack of his native air. Believing the Turtles to be Triceraton-allied military leaders, Zog pledges his undying loyalty to them and later "General" Splinter, in particular befriending Michelangelo. Zog participates in the Turtles' assault on the Shredder's feighter ship, and was a valuable asset thanks to his size and ferocity. Zog personally battles the Shredder and proves to be quite a match for the Utrom. In a heroic sacrifice, Zog grabbed hold of the Shredder and tossed them both into the flames of the sinking ship, in an attempted murder-suicide, wishing for his story of loyalty and honor to be told by his commanding officers. Tragically, the Shredder survives this attack, but the Turtles recognize that Zog gave them their lives with his sacrifice. When the Turtles travel back in time to the Cretaceous era, they encounter a Triceratops who befriends Michelangelo, who wonders if he is an ancestor of Zog, though Donatello quickly reminds him of Zog's nature as an alien. Nevertheless, Michelangelo dubs the Triceratops Zog in his friend's memory, and the dinosaur proves to be an invaluable ally during the Turtles' stay in the Cretaceous. In the final 'Back to the Sewers' season, Michelangelo encounters a ceratopsian with the horns of a Triceratops and the frill of a Styracosaurus, who he dubs Zog II, proving that the Turtles, despite the four season amount of time that had passed, had not forgotten the sacrifice of their friend. Captain Zarax appears in the 1980s animated series. Voiced by Dorian Harewood. The Utroms are aliens in the Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles universe that resemble the brain. Krang is suggested to be an Utrom in the daily comic strip. An Utrom named Krang (who has no resemblance to the original) makes a small appearance in the 2003 series. General Krang is considered an Utrom in the IDW Comics. He is one of the major antagonists in the series and is more cunning and threatening than the 1987 version. Korobon is an Utrom who declared himself ambassador to Earth from the Utrom Confederation. He addressed the U.N. on live television and explained what the Utroms had planned to do on Earth. He appeared in Volume 4 of the Mirage comic. The name is actually "Utrom" spelled backwards, Mr. Mortu is an Utrom commander (voiced by Dan Green) and one of the Utroms stranded on Earth when the Utrom criminal Ch'rell forced the prison ship transporting him to crash in feudal Japan in the 2003 series. He remains on Earth though the centuries, later stationed at the Utrom's Tokyo headquarters following World War II. He is saved from muggers by a young Hamato Yoshi and Yukio Mashimi, who discover his secret during the scuffle. He inducts both into the ranks of the Guardians, and is forced to evacuate the Tokyo facility after Mashimi betrays them to the Shredder. In the present day, he is stationed in New York City in the TCRI building, the Utroms' New York base of operations. When Splinter is injured in the Turtles' assault on the Shredder's headquarters, Mortu has him brought to the TCRI building and cared for, unbeknownst to the Turtles. When the Turtles return to Earth from their voyage across space, it is Mortu who transmatted them home and who brings the healed Splinter to them. He shows the Turtles and Splinter the origins of the Utroms on Earth using a communal mind pod, but the experience goes terribly wrong when Baxter Stockman hacks the system and traps the Turtles and Splinter in the simulation. As the Shredder (by then revealed to be the alias of the criminal Ch'rell) and his forces destroy the building, Mortu and the Utroms transmat back to their homeworld. Before they leave, Mortu presents Splinter with gift: an orb containing memories of his master Yoshi from the Guardian archives. When the Turtles later destroy the Shredder's starship with themselves aboard in an effort to keep him from plundering the galaxy, Mortu's forces arrive seconds before the detonation, encasing the Shredder's ship in a stasis bubble long enough to transmat the Turtles and Splinter to safety, and the Shredder and his accomplices to holding cells. Mortu later presides over the tribunal meeting that sentences the Utrom Ch'rell to exile aboard an icy asteroid. Mortu attended the O'Neil-Jones wedding as an honored guest. He mentions a bad experience at a previous wedding that seems to have involved being mistaken for an entree at a sushi buffet, which he remains bitter about. Professor Obligado was a brilliant Utrom scientist. His life and death are shown in the back pages of several issues of the current Tales of the TMNT. "Obligado" means "obligated/forced to" in Spanish, although his name more likely comes from the brain component "medulla oblongata". Slashuur is a character that appears in the video game "Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles 2: Battle Nexus". According to it, Slashuur is an Utrom who was slashed when Shredder attacked his own home planet. He survived, but not without two scars. He is a former competitor of the Battle Nexus. For unknown purposes, he became known as the greatest mercenary in the multiverse, which was after he somehow achieved his Slashuur exosuit, with the cost of his own memory. He worked under Shredder, not knowing he was attacked by him. His weapon is a sickle called Gengetsu, which drains people's energy upon impact, feeding it to Slashuur. He has three known costumes. They have the same design, just different colors. The first one is orange, which appears when Slashuur appears in Episode 4-5. The second one is black, which appears when Slashuur appears in Episode 10-3. The third one is when he is a playable character. It is white. After fighting the Turtles twice, he learns what really happens. Slashuur then assists them in their battle in Episode 11, but only in the cutscenes. He doesn't appear in the 2003 series, similar to Planet Zero's appearance in that same game. He is voiced by Jason Griffith. Based on a storyline by Leatherhead creator Ryan Brown, Dr. Xeinos is an Utrom scientist who was caught in the blast of the TCRI building in the Image and Mirage comics. Left behind and abandoned on Earth after the Utroms fled for their homeplanet, he was found by and befriended Leatherhead who nursed him back to health. He also played chess with Splinter. He was revealed to be the one who found Leatherhead in the sewers when he was still a normal alligator. A Zipp is in the 1987 show a little creature from Dimension X, appearing during season 4 ("The Big Zipp Attack"), and increases itself when eating. It also eats metal, and reduction requires them eating Rigidium, a very rare metal on the Earth. 