This is a list of characters from Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles, an American animated series based on the eponymous franchise that premiered on September 29, 2012 on Nickelodeon in the United States and that premiered on YTV in Canada. The Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles are a team of humanoid mutant red-eared slider turtles who were hidden ever since their mutations within the sewers of New York City and usually go up to the surface only in the night time. Leonardo / "Leo" (voiced by Jason Biggs in season 1 and most appearances in season 2, Dominic Catrambone in various episodes of season 2, Seth Green in season 3) - Leonardo is an enthusiastic ninjutsu student, wears a blue mask, and fights with two katana swords called Niten Ryu. Raphael / "Raph" (voiced by Sean Astin) - Raphael wears a red mask and fights with two sai. Known for his rage, he commonly takes it out on Mikey, and on occasions Leo, due to their feud. Michelangelo / "Mikey" (voiced by Greg Cipes) - Michelangelo is the youngest of the turtles and is a lover of video games, skateboarding, pranks and pizza. He wears an orange mask and fights with two nunchaku which convert into kusarigama via a blade inside of one of the sticks of each nunchaku and extra lengths of chain stored in the other. Donatello / "Donnie" (voiced by Rob Paulsen) - Donatello is in charge of the design and manufacture of all of the tools and weapons in the Turtles' arsenal. He is also a gifted hacker. He wears a purple mask and fights with a rokushakubo which converts to a naginata via a blade inside one end of the staff. Hamato Yoshi / Splinter (voiced by Hoon Lee) - The sensei and adoptive father of the Turtles, who was mutated into a humanoid mutant brown rat by the same mutagen that mutated his adoptive sons. April O'Neil (voiced by Mae Whitman) - The 16-year-old daughter of Dr. Kirby O'Neil with Kraang-like powers that she inherited from her mother, who becomes an ally of the Tutles, mainly the love interest of Donatello, when they saved her from the Kraang. Casey Jones (voiced by Josh Peck) - The 17-year-old son of a former NHL player at April's school who April is hired to tutor for an extra credit assignment and later became an ally of the Turtles. Hamato Miwa / Karai (voiced by Kelly Hu) - The daughter of Hamato Yoshi (Splinter) who, as a baby, was taken away from Splinter by Oroku Saki (Shredder) following her mother's death and raised in the Foot Clan against her actual father and the Turtles until her redemption as their sisterly ally, mainly the love interest of Leonardo, after discovering the truth. Kirby O'Neil (voiced by Keith Silverstein) - The psychologist father of April O'Neil, who meets the Turtles and entrusts them with taking care of April when he was captured by the Kraang and after his release, he was mutated into a mutant vampire bat, then human again, and later a half-Kraang creature. Timothy / Pulverizer / Mutagen Man (voiced by Roger Craig Smith) - An ineffective teenage ice cream truck vendor fights crime as Pulverizer after witnessing the Turtle's first battle with Baxter Stockman, eventually going too far by joining the Foot Clan and mutating himself into a 6 ft. mutant blob of mutagen with floating organs and a disintegrating touch. Jack J. Kurtzman (voiced by Robert Forster) - A private investigator and journalist investigating the disappearance of Kirby O'Neil and other missing scientists, eventually finding out about the Kraang. Ice Cream Kitty (vocal effects provided by Kevin Eastman) - A stray tabby cat that April finds in an alley and, deciding to find it a home, asks Mikey to raise as his pet. It mutated into Ice Cream Kitty upon eating Neapolitan Ice Cream that was covered in mutagen. Mighty Mutanimals - A team of mutant animals brought together by Jack J. Kurtzman to fight the Kraang. Spike / Slash (voiced by Corey Feldman) - A box turtle raised as a pet turtle by Raphael who later gets mutated by spilled mutagen in Raphael's room 6 ft. humanoid mutant box turtle with a spiked shell, long fingernails for makeshift weapons, heightened smell and superhuman agility armed with a mace and appointed leader of the Mighty Mutanimals. Leatherhead (voiced by Peter Lurie) - An American alligator owned by a kind boy with disapproving parents who gets mutated by the Kraang into an 8 ft. humanoid mutant alligator with a tough hide, uncontrollable force in his spirit, keen sense and superhuman strength that was befriended by Michelangelo and appointed second-in-command of the Mighty Mutanimals. Pete (voiced by A. J. Buckley) - A common wood pigeon mutated by the Kraang into a humanoid wood pigeon with a fondness with sourdough. Dr. Tyler Rockwell / Monkey Brains (voiced by Tom Kenny, vocal effects provided by Frank Welker) - A British neurochemist who gets mutated into a humanoid mutant chimpanzee with psychic emotion-reading abilities by Dr. Victor Falco (Rat King) and saved by Donatello, later getting appointed as brains of the Mighty Mutanimals. Garson Grunge / Muckman (voiced by Nolan North in earlier appearances, Grant Moninger in later appearances) - A humble garbageman with a history of mutant encounters as a sewer worker, who is later mutated into a 6 ft. humanoid mutant made entirely out of garbage with a banana peel cap, an exposed and eroded skeleton, a toxic vomit, control over other garbage and dissolving abilities appointed as the city's "monster hero" and later muscle of the Mighty Mutanimals. Joe Eyeball - The mutated left eye of Garson Grunge (Muckman) who acts as Muckman's conscience. Jason / Mondo Gecko (voiced by Robbie Rist) - Jason was a popular high school skateboarder who while was skating his way home was hit on the head by a canister of mutagen that was accidentally dropped from the sky by the Turtles. He mutated into a mutant leopard gecko due to his pet leopard gecko being on his shoulder at the time. Bigfoot (voiced by Diedrich Bader) - A cryptid that the Turtles encountered in the woods of Northampton. Punk Frogs - A group of humanoid mutant frogs that are the results of mutagen being dumped near their pond during Mikey's fight with Mom-Thing in "Buried Secrets". Attila the Frog (voiced by Maurice LaMarche impersonating Marlon Brando) - The leader. Genghis Frog (voiced by Kevin Michael Richardson) - The militaristic member of the Punk Frogs. Rasputin the Mad Frog (voiced by Maurice LaMarche) - Attila the Frog's right-hand frog. Napoleon Bonafrog (voiced by Jon Heder) - The laid-back member of the Punk Frogs. Frog Soldiers - A group of mutant frogs led by Genghis Frog and later by Napoleon Bonafrog. Bernie (voiced by Bill Moseley) - A physicist who discovered the Dream Beavers forty years ago. Dr. Cluckingsworth - A white chicken at the O'Neil Family summer house that develops a large brain-shaped cranium at the top of her head after ingesting the mutagen sample taken from Donnie after it leaks from Speed Demon. Renet (voiced by Ashley Johnson) - A young, immature time sorceress and the girl who Mikey has a crush on and who seems to reciprocate some of his feelings. Lord Simultaneous (voiced by Jim Piddock) - Lord Simultaneous is a time master who is Renet's boss. The Hamato Clan - The ninja clan that produced Hamato Yoshi, and the ancestral enemies of the Foot Clan. Hamato Yta (voiced by Hoon Lee) - Hamato Yoshi's father and the adopted father of Oroku Saki, and the last leader of the Hamato Clan before the Shredder came to power. Tang Shen (voiced by Minae Noji) - Hamato Yoshi's late wife and the mother of Miwa, Tang Shen was a Japanese woman with some Chinese ancestry. Professor Zayton Honeycutt / Fugitoid (voiced by David Tennant) - Zayton Honeycutt was an alien scientist from Dimension X reconstructed into an android after his body was destroyed with his brain left intact. The Foot Clan is a ninja criminal organization that was founded 1,500 years ago in Japan by an ninja named Koga Takuza when he forged an alloy stronger than steel from the stolen sacred totems of his defeated adversaries to fashion a helmet known as the Kuro Kabuto. Oroku Saki / Shredder (voiced by Kevin Michael Richardson) - The leader of the Foot Clan. Chris Bradford / Dogpound / Rahzar (voiced by Clancy Brown) - Chris Bradford was a world-famous martial artist who is secretly a prized member of the Foot Clan, armed with a 400-year-old katana and owning a chain of dojos across the country for the purpose of recruiting Foot Soldiers. He mutated into the mutant Akita called Dogpound as a result of being bitten by Shredder's pet Akita Hachinko and later mutated into a near-skeletal werewolf-like form called Rahzar upon falling into the mutagen vat. Xever Montes / Fishface (voiced by Christian Lanz) - Xever Montes was a Brazilian street urchin who was left to roam the criminal underworld of So Paulo. He later mutated into the mutant snakehead Fishface after touching a snakehead in a Chinatown marketplace. Following the mutation, he wears a water-breathing rig and mechanical legs. Baxter Stockman / Stockman-Fly - (voiced by Phil LaMarr) - Baxter Stockman was a child prodigy who tried proving his brilliance at a science fair at school by presenting a volcano with real lava, which ended up burning down the gym and getting him expelled. He later mutated into a mutant housefly as a result of a housefly landing on his nose before his mutagen collar on him exploded. Tiger Claw (voiced by Eric Bauza) - Tiger Claw was a Japanese circus performer who was mutated by the Kraang as a child into a 6 1/2 ft. humanoid mutant Bengal tiger with razor-sharp fangs and claws, heightened smell, and superhuman strength. Ivan Steranko / Rocksteady (voiced by Fred Tatasciore) - Ivan Steranko was a Russian arms dealer and artifact collector with a gold tooth and a diamond right eye, who is an old friend and business partner of Shredder. He later mutated into a mutant black rhinoceros called Rocksteady upon being pushed into a mutagen vat filled with black rhinoceros DNA. Anton Zeck / Bebop (voiced by J.B. Smoove) - Anton Zeck was a professional thief in a high-tech suit with a purple X-ray visor and armed with high-tech gadgets. He later mutated into a mutant common warthog called Bebop upon being shoved into a mutagen vat filled with common warthog DNA. Don Vizioso (voiced by Brian Bloom) - Don Vizioso is a crime lord of an Italian mafia branch in Manhattan who is an old business partner of Shredder. Fulci Twins (voiced by Eric Bauza) - Two twins that work for Don Vizioso. Shredder Mutants - A trio of mutant clones created by Stockman-Fly from the DNA of the Shredder and different crustaceans. They serve as the guards of the Foot Clan's lab. While Mikey fights Stockman-Fly, the others fight the Shredder Mutants. Once Splinter manages to regain his mind, he defeats the Shredder Mutants by kicking them into the giant fan below. In "Meet Mondo Gecko," their silhouettes are seen among the audience during the race. Shiva Shredder (voiced by Kevin Michael Richardson) - A large four-armed clone of Shredder who was created from the DNA of Shredder and a crab which also gives him a crab shell. Claw Shredder (voiced by Kevin Michael Richardson) - A clone of Shredder who was created from the DNA of Shredder and a lobster which also gives him lobster-like claws and tail. Mini Shredder (voiced by Kevin Michael Richardson) - A miniature clone of Shredder who was created from the DNA of Shredder and a shrimp which also gives him a shrimp moustache and a shrimp tail. Mega Shredder - The Mega Shredder is the result of the recreated Shredder Mutants being tricked into the mutagen vat by Bebop and Rocksteady which fused them together into a giant crustacean abomination that went on a rampage in the city. It was destroyed by the Turtle Mech. Foot Soldiers - An army of ninjas loyal to Shredder, making up the soldiers of the Foot Clan. Foot Bots - An army of robotic Foot Soldiers created by the Kraang to strengthen the Foot Clan. Chrome Dome (voiced by Nolan North) - A Foot Bot coordinator in a dark ninja outfit (which resembles Chris Bradford's full ninja outfit) armed with a plasma sword and whip that was originally built by the Kraang to keep the Foot Clan sufficient with their invasion plan. The Kraang (voiced by Nolan North) are a race of brain-shaped aliens from Dimension X piloting robotic bodies called Kraangdroids that are responsible for bringing a mutagen to Earth a thousand years ago. They have not mastered English and communicate in redundant speech. The Kraang also have enemies in the form of the Triceraton Empire. Kraang Prime (voiced by Roseanne Barr in season 1 and 2, Rachel Butera in season 3) - A 25 ft. brain-shaped alien who is the leader of the Kraang. Kraang Subprime (voiced by Gilbert Gottfried) - A Kraang spy with a robotic left eye, a huge scar, a blue tattoo across his right eye, and a robotic claw on his left front tentacle who poses as Irma Langinstein (voiced by Kate Micucci), April O'Neil's best friend in high school. He is the only Kraang who has mastered the human language so far. Mrs. Campbell (voiced by Cassandra Peterson) - A research scientist from the World Wide Genome Project who takes an interest in April O'Neil. Biotroid - A Yeti-type bio-mechanical suit with powerful arms, blades on its nipples and butt cannons. Dracodroid - A two-headed cyborg dragon creature created by the Kraang serving as their mode of transportation. Irma-Bots - A bunch of androids that resemble Kraang Subprime's Irma Laginstein disguise. The Kraang have used various creatures that come from Dimension X to help them in their plots. Among the Dimension X creatures are: Rock Soldiers - A duo of nearly identical 20 ft. humanoid rock monsters from Dimension X with regenerating abilities who serve the Kraang as guards. Traag - A 20 ft. lava-spewing rock monster from Dimension X with regenerating abilities who is in service to the Kraang. Granitor - A 20 ft. blue fire-spewing rock monster from Dimension X with regenerating abilities who resembles Traag (but is pale pink in color) and is in service to the Kraang. Dimension X Sea Monster - An unnamed alien sea creature from Dimension X resembling the Loch Ness Monster that acts as an underwater guardian for the Kraang. Kraathatrogons - A race of 100 ft. alien worms from Dimension X with antennae used as riding reins that the Kraang "milk" for mutagen. Rocktopus - A giant octopus/insect-like alien from Dimension X that sports a small creature-like attachment to draw in its prey. Living Atoms - A group of sentient large atoms from Dimension X that shoot a bolt of electricity. They first appear in "Into Dimension X," where they attack the Turtles until they finally manage to outrun them. Bio-Electrical Eyeball - A gigantic sun-size eyeball from Dimension X that shoots electricity at its enemies. It first appears in "Into Dimension X," where it blows up a nearby ship with electricity. The Purple Dragons are a Chinese-American street gang that has been extorting shop owners for protection money in the Lower East Side and Chinatown. Hun (voiced by Eric Bauza) - The new and official leader of the Purple Dragons. He is an expert martial artist Fong (voiced by Andrew Kishino) - The unofficial leader of the Purple Dragons in Season 1 and 2 (unless Rahzar and/or Fishface is present) who is sometimes armed with a butcher knife. Sid (voiced by Andrew Kishino) - A large Chinese-American member of the Purple Dragons who is sometimes armed with an axe. Tsoi (voiced by James Sie) - A moustached Chinese-American member of the Purple Dragons who is sometimes armed with a sledgehammer. Snake / Snakeweed (voiced by Danny Jacobs) - Snake was a street thug working for the Kraang as their getaway driver. He was later mutated into an mutant plant monster. Vic / Spider Bytez (voiced by Lewis Black) - Vic was a crabby New Yorker in his 40s. He was accidentally mutated into a black spider mutant called Spider Bytez. Dr. Victor Falco / Rat King (voiced by Jeffrey Combs) - Victor Falco was a scientist presumably working for the Kraang on an experiment involving mutagen and monkey DNA. He was later exposed to a neurochemical that enabled him to control rats and took on the name Rat King. Claudius, Nero, and Commodus - The other three giant rats that are named by Rat King. Rat Man Freak (voiced by Jason Biggs) - A humanoid mutant rat who just appears in "Of Rats and Men." Justin - A composite mutant that was the result of Karai pushing a button that caused a combination of DNA from various animals (examples of the DNA samples seen are a jellyfish, an isopod, an octopus, a cobra, and a house cat) to be poured into the mutagen vat. Spy-Roach / Cockroach Terminator - A cockroach that was trained by Donnie in to spy on the Kraang with special micro-equipment in "Cockroach Terminator," where Raph's fear of cockroaches is revealed. It accidentally fell into the mutagen vat and mutated with the micro-equipment fused onto it. Parasitica Wasp - A giant mutant parasitoid wasp that hypnotizes the Turtles into protecting its egg by stinging them (the hypnotized victims infect their enemies by biting them). Newtralizer (voiced by Danny Trejo) - A fire-belly newt-type Salamandrian in a weapon-upgraded suit of high-tech armor with a huge mouth used to eat the Kraang that was the result of one of the Kraang's experiments with mutagen where he was considered dangerous to them. Squirrelanoids - A group of 9 ft. humanoid mutant eastern gray squirrels with red skeleton-like skin, glowing green eyes and mouths and retractable tongues with a secondary head. It was the result of an eastern gray squirrel drinking mutagen from a spilled canister. April Derp (voiced by Mae Whitman) - A reject clone of April O'Neil who only appears in "The Kraang Conspiracy". Fungus Humungous (voiced by Fred Tatasciore) - A humongous one-eyed mutant mushroom that can grow smaller mushroom spawns and release spores that cause people to see their worst fears. It was created when a mutagen canister fell near it. Antonio / Pizza Face (voiced by John DiMaggio) - Antonio was an Italian pizza chef who ran Antonio's Pizza until he ingested mutagen thinking that it would be a good pizza topping. As a result, he turned into a mutant pizza. Ho Chan (voiced by James Hong) - A powerful martial artist during China's Shang Dynasty whose martial arts powers were so incredible that they were mistaken for sorcery. Creep - A regenerating 8 ft. mutant swamp monster made of mud and moss with the clothes of a sun-beaten scarecrow, superhuman strength, and vines used as whips growing out of his body. It was created when Leonardo vomited mutagen-based medicine on the shore of a river. The Finger (voiced by Jesse Ventura) - A hunter and animal collector wearing a shrunken head around his neck that he refers to as his mother. His name is attributed to an extra finger he has on his right hand. Mom Thing (voiced by Renae Jacobs) - A Kraang/human abomination that was a composite of the thoughts and Kraang DNA of April's mother Mrs. O'Neil. Dream Beavers - A family of over-sized humanoid North American beavers from the Dream Dimension with dream-infiltrating abilities who sought to take over Earth after they were brought to the dreams of Earth's people when a physicist named Bernie was working on dimension-traveling machine called the Dream Plug. Dire Beaver (voiced by Robert Englund) - The purple-furred leader of the Dream Beavers with glowing red eyes and a bomb symbol tattooed on his stomach who infiltrates Leo's dream. Dark Beaver (voiced by John Kassir) - A red-furred member of the Dream Beavers with glowing red eyes and a flaming skull symbol tattooed on his stomach who infiltrates Donnie's dream. Dread Beaver (voiced by Robert Englund) - An orange-furred member of the Dream Beavers with glowing red eyes and a crying cracked skull symbol tattooed on his stomach who infiltrates Raph's dream. Dave Beaver (voiced by John Kassir) - A blue and pink-furred member of the Dream Beavers with blue eyes and a rainbow-and-starred heart symbol tattooed on his stomach who infiltrates Mikey's dream than the Turtles shared dreams. Dave is the unintelligent member of the group, and is often a source of annoyance to his brothers in a fashion similar to Michelangelo and the Turtles. Speed Demon (voiced by Steven Blum) - A mutant purple muscle car entity capable of turning whoever is driving it into its mutant host with the need for speed that is the result of a car running over a spilled mutagen supply that Rasputin the Mad Frog looses during the Punk Frog's fight with the Turtles in "The Croaking" which somehow brings it to life. Chimera - An 11 ft. mutant falcon/fish/earthworm hybrid. It is the result of a falcon getting soaked with mutagen from the exploded Speed Demon after it catches and consumes a fish with an earthworm in its mouth. Savanti Romero (voiced by Graham McTavish) - The evil mutant time master who plotted to obtain Lord Simultaneous' Time Scepter. Son of Snakeweed - A spawn of Snakeweed created by Creep who put mutagen into one of Snakeweed's severed claws. Creepweed - A fusion of the parts of Creep and Son of Snakeweed. It was defeated by Donatello using Retro-Mutagen-based weed killer. Lord Vringath Dregg (voiced by Peter Stormare) - Lord Vringath Dregg is an arrogant Insectoid crime lord who is the ruler of Planet Sectoid and the lord of all insect life in the galaxy. When the Turtles incur his wrath while at a space port for smugglers, space pirates, and other space criminals with the planet not being in the Federation, Lord Dregg becomes one of their most dangerous enemies. Vreen - The foot soldiers of Lord Dregg. Hornetron - Lord Dregg's sentient hornet-shaped ship that serves as his mode of space transportation. Armaggon (voiced by Ron Perlman) - A vicious robo-shark bounty hunter. Besides the Kraang, there are other alien species in this show: The Salamandarians are a race of humanoid aliens that resemble newts and salamanders. Besides Newtralizer, among the known Salamandarians are: G'thraka (voiced by Keith David) - A Salamandarian with a mechanical eye and an armored tail who is the commander of the Salamandarian Air Force. Ik'thba / Mona Lisa (voiced by Zelda Williams) - A highly skilled female green Salamandrian and Raphael's love interest. The Triceraton Empire is an empire that is inhabited by Triceratons, a race of Triceratops-like aliens. Triceratons breathe nitrogen and the oxygen in Earth's atmosphere can lead to delusions. The Triceraton Empire have issues against the Kraang which leads them in their plot to annihilate them. Among the known Triceratons are: Triceraton Emperor - The ruler of the Triceraton Empire. So far, he's only been alluded to. Captain Mozar (voiced by Michael Dorn) - The Supreme Commander of the Triceraton fleet. He is a cunning and brutal military commander who answers only to the Triceraton Emperor. He debuts in "Annihilation: Earth" Pt. 1. Sergeant Zog (voiced by Lance Henriksen) - A scout for the Triceraton army who appears in season 3. He debuts in "Dinosaur Seen in the Sewers!" where he temporarily befriends Raphael. Commander Zorin - The second-in-command of the Triceratons. Sergeant Zark - A sergeant of the Triceraton army. The Utroms are the peaceful counterparts of the Kraang. Unlike the Kraang, they do not have a hive mind. Among the known Utroms are: Bishop (voiced by Nolan North) - An Utrom that pilots a Kraangdroid in sunglasses. Mrs. O'Neil (voiced by Renae Jacobs) - The mother of April and the wife of Kirby. Metalhead - A durable 4 ft. turtle robot created by Donatello using Kraang technology. It is armed with a variety weapons at its disposal. Carlos Chiang O'Brien Gambe (voiced by Jim Meskimen) - A local news reporter on Channel 6. Mr. Murakami (voiced by Sab Shimono) - A blind Japanese chef who runs a noodle shop. Joan Grody (voiced by Kari Wahlgren) - The hostess of a TV show called "Grody to the Max" on Channel 6. In "The Noxious Avenger," Joan Grody later reports on the heroic antics of Muckman and nearly sees the Turtles. By Muckman's latest appearance, he told Joan Grody that the "Turtles" were actually humans dressed as turtles like how the Pulverizes had operated. 80's Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles - While in a room full of portals, Donatello, April O'Neil, and Casey Jones see their 80's counterparts. In the final scene, the 80's Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles see a Kraathatrogon emerge in Manhattan and engage it. 80's Leonardo (voiced by Cam Clarke) - The 80's counterpart of Leonardo. 80's Donatello (voiced by Barry Gordon) - The 80's counterpart of Donatello. 80's Raphael (voiced by Rob Paulsen) - The 80's counterpart of Raphael. 80's Michelangelo (voiced by Townsend Coleman) - The 80's counterpart of Michelangelo. Martin Milton / Sir Malachi (voiced by Paul Reubens) - Martin Milton was a boy who played LARP game "Mazes & Mutants." He was mutated into a mutant wood sparrow upon being hit by a mutagen canister while feeding some wood sparrows. Long-Tongue Worms - Small alien worms from Dimension X. Earth Protection Force - A secret unit created to handle extraterrestrial threats. April's Great-Grandfather - The unnamed great-grandfather of April, who built the O'Neil farm many years ago. Deer Spirit - A spirit of nature residing in the woods of North Hampton with two forms: a normal white-tailed deer form and a humanoid white-tailed deer form. The following characters appear in the TV shows that are watched by the Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles: Space Heroes is fictional animated science fiction TV series that is Leonardo's favorite show. Captain Ryan (voiced by Brian Bloom) - The main hero and leader of a spaceship crew in "Space Heroes." Crankshaw (voiced by Scott Menville) - A young ensign who Captain Ryan slaps every time he panics. Dr. Mindstrong (voiced by Ben Cross) - An alien scientist. Commander Grundch (voiced by Nolan North) - The second-in-command of Captain Ryan. Rodriguez (voiced by Greg Cipes) - A soldier chosen by Captain Ryan for a suicide land mission. "That Other Guy" (voiced by Rob Paulsen) - A green-skinned human-like alien who was chosen by Captain Ryan for a suicide land mission. Trumplets - Small, cute and furry, yet annoying creatures. Celestial (voiced by Anna Graves) - A minor character who tried to seduce Captain Ryan into giving her the secret codes only for Ryan to disintegrate her. Captain Ryan keeps her boots as a memento. Hypnotica - An alien that brainwashed Captain Ryan into thinking it was a beautiful woman. Cortexicons - A race of strange mind-controlling aliens. One of them took control of Dr. Mindstrong in one episode. Digesters - A race of large, orange blob-like creatures (although one was shown) that attacked a landing party sent by Ryan. It is later heard eating the trio and belches. Super Robo Mecha Force Five is an anime show that was discovered by Michelangelo; it's also called SRMFF! for short. Captain Dash Coolstar (voiced by Brian Bloom) - The leader of the Super Robo Mecha Force Five and main character of the "Super Robot Mecha Force Five" anime who controls the torso of Mighty Super Robo Mecha. Dr. Blip (voiced by Scott Menville) - The scientist of the team who controls the right leg. Similar to Crankshaw, Dr. Blip gets slapped by Captain Dash Coolstar every time he panics. Squeakums - An alien monkey and animal sidekick of the team who pilots the right arm. Lunk (voiced by Nolan North) - The hot-tempered member who controls the left arm. Princess (voiced by Mae Whitman) - The female member who pilots the left leg. She is the princess of an entire planet and Dr. Blip has a crush on her. General Unsura (voiced by Kevin Michael Richardson) - A villain who once took control of Mighty Super Robo Mecha. Mind Master (voiced by Nolan North) - A villain who once tried to fill Coolstar's mind with madness. Skele-Lord (voiced by Josh Peck) - A skeleton-like villain who was defeated by SRMFF when they stomped on him. He later came back with a giant mecha of his own. Cyberoid X (voiced by Brian Bloom) - A minor villain. Kill Beast Bots - Robotic yellow beasts from the planet Sevenorth. Giant Space Squid - An alien squid that was destroyed by SRMFF. Hydra Beast - A three-headed dragon-like alien. It is a parody of King Ghidorah from the Godzilla series. Crognard the Barbarian is the Turtles' new favorite show since they moved to April's old farm in Season 3. Crognard the Barbarian (voiced by Brian Bloom) - The main character. Wizardess (voiced by Mae Whitman) - The magic-wielding ally of Crognar. Graah (voiced by Nolan North) - The monstrous ally of Crognar. Spooch (voiced by Scott Menville) - A small floating fish-like creature who is Crognard's ally. Mounts - Various creatures that are used as mounts for the heroes. Go-lek - Crognard's pet lizard steed. Horses - The heroes' first mounts that are parodies of the horses from Thundarr. Reptilian Steeds - Three dinosaur-like creatures that the heroes use to chase Muurg. Slug People - A race of slug-like creatures. "Slug People Leader" (voiced by Nolan North) - The supposed leader of the Slug People. Giant Mountain Demon - A giant mountain-sized demon that swallowed Wizardess, but is defeated by Crognard. Muurg (voiced by Brian Bloom) - An evil horned centaur who stole the Mystic Jewel of Koweewah. Megalord Zarrik (voiced by Jim Meskimen) - A villain who is able to change faces. Grom and Grum (voiced by Fred Tatasciore and J.B. Smoove) - A two-headed giant ogre. Gorrick Army - An army of muscular orc-like creatures that carrying various weapons. Malfidor (voiced by Tom Kenny) - A mind-controlling wizard. Rock Giant - A giant made of rock. Crognard entered it's body through its rear end and destroyed it from within. Dread Dragon Wigglepuss - A large five-headed dragon (the heads are colored red, green, blue, black and white) from the Gray Northern Middle Mountains of Mooreless. It was Crognard's final opponent in the final episode of "Crognard the Barbarian" where it ended up eating Crognard and spitting out his crown. 