This is a list of the characters in the Ice Age films, mentioned by a name either presented in the films or in official material. Manfred "Manny", is a woolly mammoth, in all four Ice Age films. He can be cold and emotional, but is otherwise caring and friendly. In the first film, while passing through the icy cave, the herd discovers cave paintings of Manny with his wife and child, who were killed by humans; this is a very emotional moment for Manny, since he failed to protect them. At the end of the film, Manny and Sid return Roshan to the neanderthals with an injured Diego trailing behind them. He finds love with Ellie in Ice Age: The Meltdown. In Ice Age: Dawn of the Dinosaurs, he goes literally mad with worry when Ellie is pregnant. At the end of the film, he becomes the proud father of a baby daughter named Peaches. In Ice Age: Continental Drift, he gets into an argument with his teenage daughter before being pulled away in by the drift with Diego, Sid and Granny. He and the team later encounter a group of pirates led by Captain Gutt. When the team escaped they destroy the ship and take Shira with them. This enrages the Captain who hunts them down. Later on, he is almost manipulated by sirens. A running gag for Manny, shown in all four films, is that if a certain character were to refer to him as fat, he would often deny it, saying that "his fur is what makes him look big" and that "it's poofy". Sidney "Sid" is a ground sloth in all four films who is clumsy, annoying, slow moving, fast-talking, unintelligent, unfit, and unattractive member with a good heart, and is voiced with a lateral lisp. Little is known from Sid's life other than that Sid once lived in a tree with other sloths that always wanted to leave Sid behind when the migration occurred, using several different ways to leave him behind. What is clear is that Sid's mother always told him that "bad news is just good news in disguise" prior to abandoning him for good. He accidentally starts a fire in the first film and learns how to do it properly towards the end; he also shows this skill in the second film, where he is worshiped by a tribe of "mini-sloths" who call him "Fire King" and try to sacrifice him. In the third film, he adopts a trio of baby Dinosaurs, and is forcibly taken to the underground dinosaur land by their mother, requiring the others to come and save him. In the fourth film, it is revealed that his full name is Sidney, though this name was also used in a deleted scene of the first film. When he, Diego and Manny are on the ice and are forced up by a water spout, they see a rainbow in the bright blue sky as he told them that "there is a rainbow at the end of every corner." A mechanical version of Sid appears in Robots during the miming scene. Sid was built along the form typical of ground sloths, short, brushy tail, clawed hands and feet, a long thin neck, ovular head with bulbous eye on both sides and a pair of buckteeth. Sids right front tooth was slightly bigger than the left, similar to his right eye, which was also somewhat bigger than the left, both eyes of which were pale green. Sids pelt was dirty and tan, and became brown when the fungus it carried dried out, Sid attributing the state of his pelt to his vegetarian diet, which he said led to a younger-looking pelt. In his films, Sid faints at certain times when he's getting hit - e.g. he faints when he gets hit on the nose by a block of ice and apparently get his tongue stuck to the floor of an ice cave. Diego is a saber-toothed cat found in all four of the films. He is Shira's love interest. He has a somewhat sarcastic personality, although it is not intended as malicious. He was sent by his pack to retrieve the human baby called Roshan; When he found Roshan in Manny and Sid's care, he pretended to lead them to the humans, but instead planned to lead them into an ambush by the pack. However, when Manny saved his life, Diego had a change of heart, telling him about the pack and helping to counterattack. He was seemingly killed by the pack's leader, Soto, but survived and joined Manny and Sid on their travels. In the second film, he was revealed to suffer from aquaphobia, but he eventually conquered it in order to save Sid, Eddie and Crash. In the third film, he began to fear that he was losing his predatory abilities from being in the "herd" too long, and considered staying in the underground dinosaur world with Buck. He changed his mind after managing to save the labored Ellie from a dinosaur attack. In Ice Age: Continental Drift, another Smilodon named Shira joins the group, and Diego feels attracted to her. During the end credits, Diego and Shira are seen nuzzling each other showing that they have now become a couple. Crash and Eddie are two twin brother opossums. Adoptive brothers of Ellie, they cared for her and taught her to hang by her tail from a tree branch when she slept, as they did. They are shown to be reckless and danger-loving, courtesy of the fact that they're both very stupid. They first made their presence known to the opening characters by means of shooting pebbles (or possibly spitballs) through reeds at Sid and Diego, then baiting them so as to humiliate them, but Diego began chasing them, leading both Sid and Diego to Ellie. After much persuasion, Ellie and her brothers joined Manny, Sid, and Diego, though Crash and Eddie spared almost no opportunity in bothering Diego. As they traveled with Manny and his friends, Ellie grew closer to Manny, putting both Crash and Eddie somewhat closer to Manny and his friends, but creating a short grudge when Manny tried "hitting on" Ellie. They even play dead when crows are nearby. In time, however, they saw behind the petty grudges and worked together with Manny, Sid, and Diego to escape the flood, but left with Ellie when she left Manny and his friends to cross the minefield, as she claimed that it was suicide to cross it. Crash and Eddie joined Ellie in trying to escape the flood, but soon ran into trouble when they were trapped in a cave. Ellie insisted that they leave her to the point of pushing them outwards from a small crevice, but they promised to return with help, and true to their word, sought out Manny to try and free Ellie. They eventually made their way into a rushing current of water and were almost swept away when a foolish Sid came along to jump into the current, leaving them, in addition to holding onto a branch for dear life against the current of water, trying to hold onto an unconscious Sid. Diego eventually helped when he jumped in and saved them from drowning along with Sid. When Manny had saved Ellie from drowning, they helped Ellie back onto solid ground, but almost drowned when the flood was encroaching. Eventually however, the waters drained, leaving Crash, Eddie, and all of the others alive. When a herd of mammoths came by (as mammoths were presumed all but extinct), they thought that Ellie would go with them and leave Manny, so they went with her. But as it turned out, Manny and Ellie stayed together because they wanted to, rather than being obligated to, and so they left onwards with Sid and Diego, as well as Crash and Eddie. In the third film, Crash and Eddie travel with the others to the dino jungle to save Sid from Momma, and both grow to idolize Buck, the one-eyed dinosaur-hunting weasel who helped them find Sid. In the third film, they also mentioned they never liked Sid. This is not true however, due to helping Buck save Sid from his incoming death. Overall, they are very close and almost inseparable as brothers, as shown in the sequels. They are near-on identical: Crash has blue eyes and a flatter nose with ridges, and was voiced by Seann William Scott while Eddie has brown eyes and a pointier nose with a brown stripe, and was voiced by Josh Peck. Their MUM is Mother Opossum, who first saved Ellie when Crash and Eddie were very small. In Ice Age: Dawn of the Dinosaurs, Crash and Eddie, along with Buck, ride a pterosaur and save Sid from a lava flow heading downwards. In Ice Age: Continental Drift, they have more minor roles than in the previous films but do partake in the final battle with Gutt's crew fighting Dobson by hopping on his back and having a rodeo, but accidentally let him charge into Manny and, later Shira, knocking them onto the other ship. Ellie is a female woolly mammoth, whom Manny, Diego, and Sid meet during their migration to escape the flood in the second movie, Ice Age: The Meltdown. It was revealed that when Ellie was young, she was separated from her herd during the ice age. She came across two opossums named Crash and Eddie, along with their mother. She later forgot her origins and thought that she was an opossum. Initially Manny was overjoyed that he had found another of his kind, but got somewhat dismayed when he realized that Ellie believed that she was an opossum. Nevertheless, he and his herd (or rather, Sid) welcomed Ellie and her brothers to travel with them. During this time, Ellie displayed the mannerisms pertaining to an opossum as well as insisting (despite obvious proof that she was not a possum) and this tested Manny's patience, namely when she claimed that the act of bravery that he had done of fighting off the sea reptile Cretaceous was dumb. Soon, Manny got his time to be alone with Ellie when he and Ellie went for a walk through a wooded area, where Ellie had a flashback that told her of her past. Upon remembering this, she knew that she was a mammoth. When Manny later implied that they must mate in order to save the mammoths from extinction, she was initially angered, but in time she apologized for overreacting. Soon, however, this new "herd" reached a horrible obstacle between them and safety from the oncoming flood: a field of geysers, which Manny explained must be crossed, but Ellie would not listen: she and her brothers felt that they must go around. But this proved to be disastrous: as they were trying to reach their destination, some rocks caved down and nearly crushed Ellie and her brothers, but trapped them instead in a sort of cave. Manny rescued Ellie, for the water was flooding into the cave where she was trapped and had nearly drowned Ellie. She and Manny escaped and regrouped with the others, but faced another problem, for the waters were still rising. After the waters had subsided a herd of mammoths made their way into the valley. Manny thought that because the mammoths had come, that Ellie would not want to remain with him. He was persuaded otherwise by Sid and Diego and confronted Ellie confessing his feelings, saying that he wanted to be together not because they had to be, but because he himself wanted to. Ellie accepted him as her mate. The mammoths trumpet while Manny and Ellie embrace. Manny and Ellie decide to stay with their old friends, taking along Sid, Diego, and the possum brothers. In Ice Age: Dawn of the Dinosaurs, she and Manny are mates and Ellie is pregnant with their first child. When they find the Dinosaur World under their feet, they have to go in and search for Sid in Lava Falls. When very close to Lava Falls, Ellie goes into labour, and gives birth to Peaches (which was named after the codeword that was for if Ellie went into labor on the trip). When they return to the surface, Ellie introduces Peaches to her new home. In Ice Age: Continental Drift, she is an understanding wife and a mother. Ellie supports Peaches, when she had an argument with Manny. When the Ice Age: Continental Drift happens she aids the herd to the Land Bridge. In the end she also fights with the Pirates. Shira appears in Ice Age: Continental Drift as part of Gutt's crew, and is Captain Gutt's pawn. She is a dazzlingly beautiful, female saber-toothed cat and Diego's lover resembling a snow leopard. She makes her first appearance in Scrat's Continental Crack-up: Part 2 standing next to Captain Gutt, who is holding Scrat. Shira first appears when Gutt's crew attacks the herds "ship". Diego is smitten upon his first sight on her as she is the most beautiful creature he has ever seen. Diego, wanting himself, Manny, Sid, and Granny to get back home, tries to chomp off all the pirates' ropes from their "ship", but is too late as Shira arrives and restrains him, mocking him for his declaration of "I don't fight girls" by pinning him down and saying, "I can see why". After Manny and the others escape by capsizing Gutt's iceberg, Shira is seen in the water, calling out for her crewmates' help; only Flynn is concerned over Shira's whereabouts, but Gutt ignores this and demands his crew to move on forward without her. She is rescued against her will by Manny, and is angered when Diego calls her "Kitty" for calling them a "bad joke" of a herd. She journeyed with the herd to an island. Once there, she attempts to escape, but Diego catches up to her and she is imprisoned in a tree, much to her anger. That night, Shira is approached by Diego, who learns she left her pack as he once did. Diego tells her that she simply traded one pack for another, and that his herd always has each other's backs, pointing out that Gutt hadn't made any thoughts of planning a search party for her in the first place. The next morning, Shira escapes and finds Gutt making a new ship on the other side of the island. Gutt angrily berates her for not killing the herd, and punishes her by making Squint his new first mate. Gutt then orders Shira to target Diego, declaring that he would have a tiger-skin rug when it ended, he didn't care whose, somewhat proving Diego's point to Shira that Gutt never had his back on anyone, including hers. When the herd enacts their plans to take Gutt's new ship back home, Shira once again tackles Diego, who convinces her to turn against Gutt and come with him. Because of their newfound love, she follows Diego to the ship, but on seeing that Gutt is catching up to them, secretly puts ice in his way. As the herd floats away, Shira tells Diego that she has his back, while both looking at each other longingly as the boat leaves implying they have feelings for each other. During the return home, Diego realized he had fallen in love with Shira, despite denying it to Manny and Sid. Later, when Gutt is holding Peaches hostage, Shira is seen struggling to get up, implying that Gutt had physically punished Shira for her betrayal. During the fight, she protects Ellie from Squint, mocking the rabbit's "cute little bunny nose". After the defeat of Gutt's crew, Shira joins the herd, sharing a loving look with Diego. She also rests her head on Diego's shoulder during the herd's landing on switchback cove. In the end credits, Shira nuzzles against Diego's side showing that they have now become a couple. Shira is voiced by Jennifer Lopez in Ice Age: Continental Drift. Granny is a ground sloth and also Sid's grandmother. She joins the herd after her own family abandons her, calling her "dead weight" to save their own skins before the earthquake (that and to avoid Sid). Despite, how Granny sometimes picks on and berates her grandson, Sid is very happy to have her around. Granny is loud, abrasive, tough, sarcastic, somewhat crazy, as she once thought Gutt was actually being nice to her. Over time she begins to warm up to the group, as Sid asked Granny why their own family abandoned him and Granny; for a moment, Granny sympathetically answers "because they think we're screw-ups and can't do anything right". She even helps out in several attempts to get back home. At the end Granny admits that Sid is lucky to have a real family (his herd) that care so much about him. She quickly asks Sid to chew her food, but Sid had fixed her a new set of teeth, a pair of shark teeth that were originally Raz's weapon but Granny uses them quite well as they are very sharp. It is shown in the film she had an allegedly imaginary pet named Precious, which showed up at the end and turned out to be real: a giant whale who defeats Gutt's crew (minus Squint) by blasting them away. Precious then helped the group to South America and Granny bid her pet a fond good-bye. Peaches is the daughter of Manny and Ellie, born in the Dinosaur's world whilst they were under attack by a pack of Guanlong. She appeared close to end of Ice Age: Dawn of the Dinosaurs and was named after the code-word that was thought up to say that Ellie was going into labour. Manny also claims that peaches are sweet, round and fuzzy, just like Peaches and Ellie. She looks exactly like her mother, Ellie (which Sid thinks is very lucky). At the end of the film, she returned to the surface with her parents and the rest of the group. She is voiced by Ciara Bravo in Ice Age: A Mammoth Christmas and Keke Palmer in Ice Age: Continental Drift. Peaches appears as a teenager in Ice Age: Continental Drift. She is self-taught to do some possum moves just like her mother. Shortly after Scrat sets off a domino effect of the continents breaking apart, she is shown sneaking up in the morning going to the falls with Louis, a molehog who is also her best friend. After Manny embarrasses her in front of Ethan, her crush, and the other mammoths by grounding her, she and her father get into a fight, and as a result, when he, Diego, and Sid get separated from them on an iceberg, she feels not only helpless to stop it but also guilty. Later during the events of the film, it is Ethan who shows an interest in her hanging out with him and his friends. As a kind of condition, he suggests for her to leave Louis behind. Convinced he'd start to like her, she readily agrees. The following day, while walking with Ethan and the other mammoths, unbeknownst to them that Louis was looking for her, they begin to question her about her friendship with him. When she claims to have none so as to gain their approval, Louis overhears, also making himself known. Shortly after Louis leaves, Peaches begins to grow tired of the other mammoths' teasing, as immediately afterwards a tremor causes a dangerous moving cloud of dust, and instead of expressing concern they try to convince her that it was fun escaping the blast. Upon calling them out on their stupid behaviour, Ethan and the others carelessly judge her by her family being part possum, causing her to get upset, confront Ethan, then leave. At the end of the movie, she and her herd are, in part, saved by Louis, who bravely challenges Captain Gutt, and distracts him from Peaches by slamming a chunk of ice on his foot. His bravery, as well as Peaches' own heroics in saving her mother, impress Ethan and his friends, who ask to hang out with them instead. Louis casually agrees. Peaches' best friend Louis, is a soft-spoken, somewhat weak, and slightly cute hedgehog, who is always dutifully by her side and eager to help, even if it is to help her get closer to pretty boy Ethan. When Peaches' heart is ultimately broken by Ethan, Louis secretly wishes that she could see that he is the only one who adores her just as she is. Peaches is very oblivious to his crush on her. He tries to be the voice of reason when she is up to some things, because of his soft-spoken demeanor and his somewhat cowardice, Manny alongside Crash and Eddie, have dubbed him "Wiener". Even after having his feelings hurt by Peaches, Louis comes to his friends side when she is held hostage by Gutt. He fends off Gutt long enough for Peaches to escape, impressed by his bravery,Manny even encourages Louis to be more open minded to adventures like Peaches. Ethan and his posse even ask to hang out with him, as they seem to move on in life as friends. The only flaw with Louis' life in Ice Age is, along with "The Brat Pack", he seems to lack parents and other family members that he would live with. Scrat is a sabre-toothed squirrel who is obsessed with collecting acorns, constantly putting his life in danger to obtain and defend them. He has his own stories in the film which mostly independent of those of the main characters, though the two do intersect at times. In a special feature in the second film's DVD, his name has been stated to be a mix of the words "squirrel" and "rat", his species allegedly believed to have been a common ancestor of both. In the Ice Age DVD commentary, he is referred to as "The Scrat" by directors Chris Wedge and Carlos Saldanha. Scrat is never referred to by name in dialogue, but only named in the credits. Scrat is voiced in all Ice Age movies and short films by director Chris Wedge. He directly interacts with the story's main characters on eight occasions, mostly with Sid. In the first film, he attacks Sid when the latter tries to eat his acorn, successfully regaining it. He later meets Manny, Sid, and Diego asking him where the baby's family is and Scrat attempts to tell them about nearby saber-toothed tigers, but Diego kicks Scrat away before he could do so. At the end of the second film, after Scrat created a hole in the valley and released all the melted ice, later attacks Sid for saving his life (when he had already died and gone to paradise and was about to get a giant acorn). In the third film, Scrat is stepped on by Manny and falls onto Sid's head while chasing his acorn. Next, he appears when Sid's "children" are batting a ball around, the ball actually being Scrat. Also, when Scratte rips off his skin, he screams so loud the herd can hear him, causing Crash and Eddie to deem the place a "Jungle of Misery". Lastly, while Diego is sleeping, he wakes up when he gets hit with Scrat's acorn. In the fourth film, when Sid pries open a clam, he finds Scrat inside. Sid's grandmother mistakes Scrat for a rat and continuously hits him with her cane until he falls into the ocean. Scrat constantly hunts for his acorn either to bury it or eat it, but fate always gets in the way. He invariably ends up in humorous or painful situations: being struck by lightning, pursued by avalanches, and repeatedly knocked unconscious while fighting for his acorn. Yet he never gives up. Scrat generally loses, except when he defeats a school of piranhas and successfully "battles" Sid. Scrat is the main character in three short films. In the first, Gone Nutty, he loses his collection of acorns in a catastrophic chain of events. He jams his acorn into a hole in the middle of the collection, which shatters the pile and with it the entire continent - which begins the continental drift. In the second film, No Time for Nuts, Scrat finds a time machine left by a time-traveler and visits several historical events. He becomes trapped in a frightening future when oak trees have become extinct, but somehow manages to return to the series' time period. A third Scrat short, Scrat's Continental Crack-up, was released in 2010 accompanying the feature Gulliver's Travels, and later with Rio as a promotion for the fourth Ice Age movie Ice Age: Continental Drift. Scrat has a cameo in Surviving Sid, that is important to the plot. Scrat is the main character in the Ice Age: The Meltdown video game. He is also playable in the other two games based on the series. Scrat makes a cameo appearance in the Family Guy episode "Sibling Rivalry", in a cutaway gag in which Peter Griffin says Scrat's nuts are his, leading Scrat to attack Peter. The origin of Scrat is disputed. Cartoon designer Ivy Supersonic claims she created the character in 1999, after seeing a squirrel-rat hybrid in Skidmore College's Case Green. She called her character "Sqrat" and says she presented the idea to 20th Century Fox movie executives. A CNN report by Jeanie Moos of Ivy's discovery was aired in 2000, two years before Ice Age went into development. Supersonic claims the studio's own documents actually identified the character in Ice Age as "Sqrat", though her creation was not sabre-toothed. Ivy Supersonic was offered a $300,000 settlement by Fox Studios. She turned it down and subsequently lost in court. The case is currently in appeal (Case # 04401 Court of Appeals, Second Circuit, NYC). She still has hopes of receiving damages for her claimed infringement. Supersonic did win a partial summary judgement from the Trademark Trial and Appeal Board in a reverse suit, Fox Film Corporation v. Ivy Silberstein (her real name), in which Fox had tried to prevent her from registering the trade mark "SQRAT". [1] According to Wedge, artist Peter de Seve came up with the design for Scrat after a visit to the Museum of Natural History. Wedge called it "sort of a squirrel based on some lemur." While initially created as a fictional species for comedic purposes, in 2011 scientists have discovered a mammal quite similar to Scrat. The newly described taxon, Cronopio dentiacutus wasn't a true squirrel, nor did it live in the Cenozoic era. Instead it belonged to the dryolestoids, a group of mammals thought to be the ancestors of therians, and it lived nearly 100 million years ago in Patagonia. The precedence of the animated character to the discovery of the real one is an example of what is known as the "Dim Effect". As of the 2013 film Epic, Scrat has gone on to become the mascot of Blue Sky Studios and is featured in their production logo. Roshan, or "Pinky", was the baby that Manny, Sid, and Diego returned to his father. Roshan is the young son of a human tribe chief. While sleeping one morning, his tribe is attacked by a pack of smilodons. The leader of the pack, Soto, wants Roshan as revenge for Roshan's father Runar killing half the pack and using their skin as clothes and their flesh as food. His mother, Nadia, is able to fend off Diego, whose mission is to retrieve him. However, she is cornered over a waterfall and, in a desperate attempt to save her son, leaps over the waterfall, holding Roshan tightly in her arms. They are both found by Manny and Sid at the riverside. Using what little strength she has left, she gives Roshan to Manny and Sid in hopes that he will be safe with them. Roshan's prime care-giver is Sid, the only member of the group who initially has any interest in him, Manny being too cynical to care and Diego secretly planning to kill him. Manny, after his previous experience with humans, is reluctant to have anything to do with the baby, but eventually bonds with him. At the end of the movie, Roshan is reunited with his tribe. Runar is particularly happy to learn that the baby has learned to walk during his time with Manny, Sid, and Diego. Soto is the deadly and dangerous leader of a pack of saber-toothed cats. He wants to eat Roshan in vengeance for the murders of several of his pack-mates. As part of his plan to take Roshan, Soto plans an attack on the human camp so that while he and three other pack members would attack the humans, Diego would slip in, unnoticed, and take Roshan. Diego fails at this task, and Soto is not pleased, telling Diego to bring Roshan to Half-Peak where he would meet with the others. Soto dispatched his fellow pack members Zeke and Oscar to warn Diego to hurry and bring Roshan or not return at all, though was reciprocated with the news that alongside Roshan, Soto would receive a mammoth. Soto eventually made it with his pack to Half Peak and informed Diego that while he had his doubts, he was pleased that Diego had made it. Soon it would happen that unbeknownst to Soto, Diego was in league with both Manny and Sid, and so Sid would lure Soto and his pack-mates away from both Manny and Roshan with a decoy made of snow. Soto made his way to the end of the altercation in which he made an attempt to kill Manny, but was stopped by Diego, whom he severely wounded. Thereafter, Manny smacked Soto into a wall of ice, knocking loose a row of icicles, the sharp ice formations falling, and end up killing Soto offscreen. = Zeke is a member of a pack of saber-toothed cats shown in the first film. He is led by Soto, who is out to seek Roshan and kill him. Zeke is dark-gray and looked mangy, as well as acting the part of a suck up. It is revealed in a deleted scene that he, like the other members of his pack, wanted very much to follow the "walking buffet" south, but Soto would not hear of it. Zeke accompanied Oscar to tell Diego to hurry up and bring back Roshan or not to come back. He soon made it along with the rest of his pack to Half Peak, where he tried to catch Sid and Roshan, but was stopped by Sid who stomped him into a tiny crevice with his hindquarters sticking out. It is unknown what happened to him afterwards. = Oscar is a member of a pack of saber-toothed cats in the first film. Oscar is shown to doubting Diego's abilities because he slipped up once in bringing Roshan to Soto. In a deleted scene he is seen telling his packmates of his disapproval of Soto's plans to stay and hunt the humans instead of following the migrating herds traveling south. Oscar went along with Zeke to find Diego and warn him to hurry and bring Roshan. Oscar made it with the rest of the pack to Half Peak where he attempted to kill Manny but was defeated along with the others. He is last seen running away after he and Lenny see Soto killed. = Lenny is a member of a pack of saber-toothed cats in the first film. Lenny, along with the rest of the pack, attacked the human encampment but were fended off by the humans' dogs who fought alongside the humans against the pack sending them off. One of the pack members Diego was expected to steal the baby Roshan from the humans but missed his chance when Roshan's mother Nadia escaped with her child through a waterfall. Angry at Diego's failure the pack leader Soto orders Diego to retrieve Roshan and bring him to Half Peak where the others will be waiting. Soto was later informed by other pack members Zeke and Oscar that Diego will bring Roshan back along with a wooly Mammoth called Manny who has been caring for Roshan along with Sid the sloth. Lenny met up with Diego along with the other members of the pack at Half Peak where Zeke reminisced the joys of mammoth flesh much to Lenny's displeasure (saying his only lines in the film, "Hey, knock it off. I'm starving!" and "I told you to knock it off!"). He then demanded Zeke to stop talking about food and then tries to hit him but is stopped by Soto who tells him to save energy as mammoths don't go down easily. Soto plans an ambush on Manny so he would be caught by surprise and so he ordered the pack not to attack until they saw Manny but Diego secretly turned on his pack after he had be shown real compassion and caring from Manny and Sid so he tempted Zeke to leap into action and attack. The surprise given away, the pack pursue Sid as he slides down a snowy slope on a piece of bark soon after Lenny and Oscar who had been chasing Sid where impeded by a large log Manny threw at them. Once they recovered they saw that Soto had been killed when he tried to attack Manny and that Diego had intervened Soto's attacks. Soto hit a wall of ice and a number of icicles came down and killed him. Seeing the death of their leader, Lenny and Oscar run off. Unlike the rest of his pack mates who are all saber-toothed cats, Lenny is a scimitar-toothed cat, a close relative of the saber-toothed cat, stated in the book Ice Age: The Essential Guide. Runar was the chieftain of a human tribe shown in the first film. Runar was a leader for a tribe of neanderthals (referred in the film as humans). He was the father of Roshan and husband of Nadia, and cared greatly for his family, all the while leading them and the rest of the tribe as a nomadic group to travel from place to place. In one encampment that his tribe set up, half a pack of saber-toothed tigers was killed and the furs taken as coats and clothing. In vengeance, the leader saber-tooth named Soto decided to plan an attack on Runar's tribe so as to take his son Roshan and kill him in vengeance for those saber-teeth slain in battle by Runar's tribe. The attack almost worked, but Runar's tribe had dire wolves that detected Soto's pack coming and the human tribe did battle with the saber-teeth, with Soto fighting directly with Runar. In the melee, the baby Roshan was taken by his mother from a saber-toothed tiger named Diego, and the hunters successfully warded off the saber-teeth only to find out that his son had disappeared and his wife was gone. Runar had no choice left but to begin the travel to another camp far off, tracking the treacherous saber-teeth on the way and finding clues as to his son's whereabouts. In time, Runar made it near the settlement and was finally re-united with his son, but not before meeting face-to-face with Manny and Sid, the two animals who returned the child. Runar was on his guard about Manny at first, as he appeared hostile, but quickly came to see that he meant no ill will, simply to return the child. Runar thanked Manny by giving him the charm bracelet that had once been Roshan's, and with that Runar left the scene with his tribe and his son in tow. Nadia was the wife of the chief of a neanderthal tribe shown in the first film. Nadia had a husband, Runar, and a baby son, Roshan. She and her family lived a peaceful life together with their tribe until the day when a pack of saber-toothed tigers invaded their camp to abduct the youngest member, Roshan. Nadia staved off an attack on Roshan long enough to run away quickly from Diego who was pursuing her. Nadia ran with Roshan in her arms until she reached a great waterfall and was cornered. She jumped, holding on tightly to her son all the while; she then ended up on the riverbank below, meeting Manny and Sid, two animals that were passing by. With the last of her strength, Nadia nudged Roshan to these animals in the hopes that they could be entrusted with her son. Seconds after this act, she slipped slowly from the riverbank, disappearing. Her fate remains unknown, although it is heavily implied she drowned. These birds are portrayed as greedy for watermelons claiming it to be their private stockade for the ice age. All these dodos hate to be extinct. Trying to get a watermelon from Sid, Diego and Manny who try to ask for it for the baby's hunger, some of these dodos accidentally fall to where they tossed the melon. Four of these fall into the pit to burn to death as one warns a few, where another melon is also incinerated. The rest are defeated by Sid who protects the last melon from them by getting through them. = Dab was the head dodo shown in the first film. The dodos were collecting a stockpile for the winter, and one of them stole the melon that Manny had spotted for Roshan. When Manny, Sid and Diego went to the dodos to get the melon back, they found the dodos on parade. The dodos' stockpile so far consisted only of three melons, including the stolen melon. After Manny pointed this out, the dodos fought to stop Manny, Diego and Sid getting at the melons. In the fight, the first melon fell over a cliff and several dodos, including the flock's "last female", jumped over as well in a suicidal attempt to retrieve it. The second melon bounced into a boiling tar pit, along with three more unfortunate dodos who were trying to stop it falling in. Sid managed to get the last melon, and the remaining dodos also fell off the cliff, a parody as to why they are extinct today. In Ice Age: The Meltdown, another dodo gets fried while attempting to cross the geyser fields. Carl and Frank are two male Brontops. Carl had thick lips and a thick horn, while Frank had more pointed lips and a thinner horn. They referred to Sid as an overgrown weasel. The two appeared at the beginning of the film when Sid the sloth was shown stepping on their salad and eating an important part of it, the dandelion. The two animals soon chased after him in the hopes of killing him, but were stopped forcefully by Manny the mammoth, by being hurled through the air. They'd held a powerful grudge against Sid for what he'd done and when they next saw him, he was in the same hot mud pool that they were in and was erroneously referring to them as ladies. Again, Carl and Frank stampeded after the hapless sloth, but were waylaid when they saw that he had already been "killed" by a saber-toothed cat named Diego (which was part of Sid's plan to get them to be fooled into leaving him alone and not trying to kill him off) and gave up their chase post-haste stating that "carnivores have all the fun." Jennifer and Rachel are two ground sloths from the first film. The two were shown being sweet-talked by Sid to impress them while he had the baby Roshan in tow. Jennifer admitted that she found some of Sid's qualities to be most attractive, and when Sid left, the two spoke to each other on how, despite his lack of good looks, he was a family-type. These two female sloths (in a deleted scene from the film) were shown scorning Sid when he was shown to simply be using the baby to mate with them, though Rachel was much more straightforward as she kicked him directly in the groin while calling him "pig". Jennifer was a thickset dark-blue sloth with short curly hair and a medium-sized nose. Rachel was considerably thinner and had light tan fur and a blonde ponytail directly at the top of her head and a smaller nose. Sylvia is a female ground sloth who was cut from the first Ice Age film, but can be found in the deleted scenes of the 2-Disc DVD release and The Classic Storybook and The Movie Novel. Sylvia was shown waylaying Sid into traveling with her, for she was seeking commitment. Sid, not wanting any of this, had her sent off as he managed to put her in the path of some running glyptodonts. Sylvia eventually found him again, though this time, she found him and was still adamant to go migrating with him. Sid agreed and told her that he would leave her for a moments to get turnips so as to stuff their cheeks to migrate, but rather ran off to escape from her without her knowing it, and she followed him to where she found him: in the jaws of Diego, the saber-toothed cat. She did not believe that Sid was truly dead, and sullenly told Diego to "eat him". It is presumed that after that, she left Sid alone. Sylvia had red-colored fur, red, untidy hair and a small nose. According to the Ice Age DVD commentaries, the scenes with her were cut because of two reasons. The first reason was for timing purposes; although the scenes with her were funny, they took up a lot of time and didn't focus on the main plot. The second reason was because of Sid's behavior towards her; considering that the creators of the movie were still experimenting with Sid's personality, they found out that Sid was acting a bit mean towards her during these cut scenes and decided to take them out. Also according to these commentaries, there was an alternate ending to the first movie. After Sid and Manny head south and met up with the other animals (they headed south without Diego because in earlier drafts of the movie Diego died and never came back), Sid matured after losing a friend, and when he saw Sylvia, he was nicer to her, and asked her to be his mate. Even though she was a cut character, she was cut from the movie fairly late. Most of the sequences with her were completely animated and rendered (and usually when it comes to animated films scenes usually get cut in the storyboard phases). Sylvia was also seen in earlier trailers of the movie as well as early ads and posters. An Holmesina living in the days of the Ice Age, Fast Tony was a seller trying to give off items such as reeds and bark to other denizens of the Ice Age so as to escape the world's end, which by chance, he predicted and it came true. Fast Tony would give off products in exchange for whatever the other animals would bring by with the help of his "assistant", an insipid glyptodon named Stu. He was notoriously amoral with others, even being criticized by Manny for willing to sell off "his own mother for a grape". Fast Tony immediately asked if that was an offer, then pretended he had not thought of it for the benefit of the watching animals. Stu was more Fast Tony's guinea pig to prove their wares' worth, rather than his actual partner and proved more useful dead than alive, as Fast Tony had taken Stu's shell (as Stu had just been killed by Maelstrom and Cretaceous) and shamelessly tried to pawn it off to other animals as a personal "mobile home". Fast Tony was last seen at the end of Ice Age: The Meltdown using Stu's shell as a raft. Stu was a Glyptodon who was Fast Tony's partner. He seemed to be disliked by Tony due to his stupid personality. He assisted Fast Tony to warn the valley that the dam of ice would burst and helped to demonstrate Fast Tony's snorkel. After the revelation of the flood was proved to be true, Stu took the test snorkel and used it to swim underwater. Shortly after scaring James, a young anteater, Stu was grabbed and pulled underwater by an unknown attacker. As the other animals begin to leave, Fast Tony returns to the pool to get Stu to come along, but Stu's shell is suddenly spat out of the water by the unknown assailant. Fast Tony, after looking at the shell, sees that it makes a great mobile home and runs off after the other animals to try and unload it on someone. Meanwhile, the unknown attackers turn out to be the marine reptiles Cretaceous and Maelstrom. In the ending after the flood, Fast Tony is discovered to have been using the shell as a boat, but he leaves the shell behind as he no longer needs it. The Lone Gunslinger is a Teratornis. The Gunslinger acts as the voice that warns the other animals of the dangers coming soon due to the valley where they reside flooding up with water. The Lone Gunslinger only warns them of the danger and little else, rather hoping that one or two of the animals leaving will die, furnishing food for him and the other vultures which he is presumably family and friends with. As he watches all of the creatures in the valley leave to safety, he makes snide remarks with his friends about it, and this escalades to the point of singing a musical number on how much they plotted to eat the other animals. The Lone Gunslinger was last shown flying over the "boat" full of escaping animals and making snide remarks. In the storybook version, he and his fellow vultures were shown to have ended up feasting on Cretaceous and Maelstrom. Cretaceous is a Pliosaur. Cretaceous is shown in the beginning frozen in a great block of ice that was jarred loose when the wall of ice began crumbling. The ice melted, releasing both him and Maelstrom into the lake which was all but abandoned by most animals. When they made it to the ice lake, the first animal that they had encountered and eaten was Stu the glyptodont, leaving behind only his shell. The two sea reptiles then swam further down the series of rivers where they eventually reached Manny's herd as well as Crash, Eddie, and Ellie. Cretaceous made a great lunge at Manny, but was caught on his tusks, only to be flung far off, hitting a piece of ice and falling back into the water. Later, when the dam broke, the two reptiles went swimming on the wall of water that was slowly approaching towards the escaping masses and pulled down Manny when he was swimming to save Ellie. Manny devised a plan to rid himself of the two sea reptiles, by having them try to chase him, he tricked them into hitting a log that was wedged under a large rock. The plan worked, freeing Ellie, and the boulder falls on Cretaceous and Maelstrom, killing them. In the storybook version, The Lone Gunslinger and his fellow vultures were shown to have ended up feasting on Cretaceous and Maelstrom. He, along with Maelstrom, are the main antagonists of the second Ice Age film. Maelstrom is an Ichthyosaur. Maelstrom is shown in the beginning frozen in a great block of ice that was jarred loose when the wall of ice began crumbling. The ice melted, releasing both Cretaceous and him into the lake which was all but abandoned by most animals. When they made it to the ice lake, the first animal that they had encountered and eaten was Stu the glyptodont, leaving behind only his shell. The two sea reptiles then swam further down the series of rivers where they eventually reached Manny's herd as well as Crash, Eddie, and Ellie. Maelstrom intended to eat Sid but could not catch him, as Sid was already escaping with Diego, and had only just escaped Maelstrom as he broke off a massive chunk of ice where the sloth and saber-tooth had stood only moments before. Later, when the dam broke, the two reptiles went swimming on the wall of water that was slowly approaching towards the escaping masses and pulled down Manny when he was swimming to save Ellie. Manny devised a plan to rid himself of the two sea reptiles, by having them try to chase him, he tricked them into hitting a log that was wedged under a large rock. The plan worked, freeing Ellie and killing Cretaceous and Maelstrom. In the storybook version, The Lone Gunslinger and his fellow vultures were shown to have ended up feasting on Cretaceous and Maelstrom. He, along with Cretaceous, are the main antagonists of the second Ice Age film. The number of pirhana resided in the ice lakes of the waterpark, where they were pursed by flocks of Baptornis and scattered by other animals. The pirhana, however, found potential prey in the form of Scrat that had fall in the lake. The pirhanas bared their teeth and chased Scrat out of the water onto an ice floe, one leaping out of the water and biting him on the paw; this paw was holding his prized acorn. Angry that something had attempted to take his acorn. Scrat seized another pirhana and used it to hit at others, fighting and kicking the fish away, stunning them all. As one attempted to edge back to the water, Scrat stomped on its side, forcing it to release an acorn that is held. In Ice Age 3, a school of pirhana met a baby tyrannosaurus, (one of Momma's babies that had been kidnapped by Sid) and bared their teeth at it. The young tyrannosaur bared his own teeth and frightened the fish off. A tribe of Mini Sloths are smaller sloths who worship Sid and call him "Fire King". Immediately afterwards, they try to throw him into lava, believing that they can avert the flood by sacrificing him. However, he escapes. Ashley is a minor beaver character in the second film. In her appearance, she treats Sid like a piata and appears to be a ringleader among the kids. Scratte (pronounced "Scrat-tay") is a seductive female saber-toothed flying squirrel that makes her debut in Ice Age: Dawn of the Dinosaurs. She is seen in the second trailer with Scrat battling with her for the acorn by propelling themselves down a gorge to reach the fallen acorn, and succeeding. Scratte is also seen as a love interest for Scrat. Scratte's personality traits have been shown to be flirtatious, feisty, and intelligent. She is equally determined in catching the acorn and uses her feminine wiles to her advantage. She doesn't, however, seem to be nearly as obsessed with acorns as her male counterpart, as she was shown trying to destroy the acorn at the end of the film out of jealousy. Scratte will often injure and manipulate Scrat in the process of retrieving it. (However, her attraction to him is implied). In the fourth movie, Scratte appeared again in a cameo role as a siren only then to be dismissed by a disinterested Scrat. Furthermore, in the fourth film, tons of her species live on Scratlantis. Buck (short for Buckminster, and long for Buh) is a weasel that makes an appearance in Ice Age: Dawn of the Dinosaurs . He is missing his right eye and wears a leaf as an impromptu eyepatch, as well as having a scar on one of his ears and seems slightly insane (he claims that he woke up one day, married to an ugly pineapple, but he still loved "her", and Manny calls him a "deranged hermit"). According to the official website, Buck is one-eyed and relentless in his hunting for dinosaurs. Buck's archenemy is a large albino Baryonyx he calls Rudy, who gouged out Buck's eye and whose tooth he later sharpened into a knife that he carries with him. Buck claims to have sadly been killed by Rudy, but he lived. In fact, Buck is the only inhabitant of the dinosaurs' world who does not fear Rudy in the slightest, though he possesses a deep respect for him. Due to living underground for so long, he has an extensive knowledge of the dangers of the dinosaur world. Buck first meets Manny, Crash, Eddie, Diego, and Ellie (who he at one point refers to as "preggers") after they descend into the jungle in pursuit of Sid and Momma, and saves them from a dinosaur attack. He has been living in the jungle for quite some time, persistently hunting Rudy to avenge the loss of his eye, and agrees to lead them to Lava Falls, where Momma has taken Sid, and rescues him after taking control of a Harpactognathus. After Rudy's potential death, Buck, having lost his purpose in life, decides to join the herd and live on the surface. Upon hearing a distant familiar roar that tells him that Rudy survived the fall, he chooses to stay and causes a cave-in that seals off the path between the surface and the underground jungle, trapping him inside and everyone else on the surface. He and Rudy proceed to continue their battle. Buck and Rudy make brief cameos in Scrat's Continental Crack-up and Ice Age: Continental Drift when Scrat falls through the Earth and passes them. Momma was a female Tyrannosaurus. She took Sid from his herd when he took her eggs from her. She brings Sid to Lava Falls and the two compete to see who can care for her babies better. Sid loses, but is allowed to stay. However, they are separated later and Sid is attacked by Rudy. She is also called Momzilla by Sid. Momma later returns when Manny, Ellie, Diego, Sid, Crash, Eddie, and Buck are under attack by Rudy and knocks Rudy off a cliff to his apparent death proceeding to bid Sid farewell. Rudy was a gigantic albino Baryonyx who is feared by all the creatures in the valley except Buck and Momma Tyrannosaur. When Buck first arrived in the jungle, he was attacked by Rudy, who scratched him in the right eye, thus poking it out, and very nearly devoured him, but Buck escaped, knocking out one of Rudy's teeth in the process. Rudy appears to have held a grudge ever since, especially since the impact left behind a crack in his mouth which prevented any new teeth from growing. (Note: Rudy is constantly mistaken for a Spinosaurus, and although he has features of both species, the filmmakers have directly stated he is a Baryonyx.) Rudy first appears when he attacks Sid and chases him onto a rock floating over Lava Falls, and later attacks Sid and company full force as they are about to exit the jungle. The group quickly proves to be no match for the Baryonyx, but are saved by Momma, who knocks him off of a cliff. Rudy survives, however, and he and Buck continue their eternal war. Rudy is last seen roaring in frustration as Buck is riding on top of the massive dinosaur laughing, as Rudy runs through the jungle. Buck and Rudy made a brief cameo in the following film Ice Age: Continental Drift. Johnny is a young Aardvark who is swallowed whole and alive by Egbert. Johnny's mother demands that Sid, currently posing as the young dinosaurs' father orders the dinosaur to return her son or else they will leave the playground. Johnny was not found just then; instead a young Gastornis, named Madison, is brought up. But then Manny and Ellie come by. Egbert got scared, and immediately regurgitated Johnny. His mother promptly drags him off. He is referred to by Sid and his mother as "Little Johnny". The unnamed mother of Johnny. She looked on in horror when Egbert tried to eat little Johnny. She later demanded that Sid tell Egbert to spit her son out. Egbert seemed to comply, but instead spat out a young Diatryma named Madison to her annoyance. When Manny arrived on the scene, Egbert regurgitated Little Johnny in shock and his mother comforted him. The baby dinos are three baby Tyrannosaurus from Ice Age: Dawn of the Dinosaurs. There are two boys (Egbert and Yoko), and one girl (Shelly). Sid took them away from their mother, but she came searching for them and took Sid away with them, then she later became friends with Sid at the end of the movie. They are very friendly dinosaurs, but due to being carnivores, they go too far in playing with other animals which eventually winds up with one of them eating a couple of the kids. Despite knowing that Sid isn't their real father, they still loved and care for him to a point of protecting him from their angry mother. They are later returned to their mother at the end of Ice Age: Dawn of the Dinosaurs. Roger is a Harpactognathus who was used by Buck, alongside with Crash and Eddie, to go to the Lava Falls to rescue Sid from Rudy. During the attempt, they were attacked by a flock of Cearadactylus, but they managed to evade them and save Sid in time. After returning to the Plates of Woe, the pterosaur flew away after Buck asked it if it had ever thought of settling down and starting a family. Roger's gender is somewhat unspecified, for the video game adaption refers to it as a female. Other dinosaurs include Ankylosaurus, Brachiosaurus, Kentrosaurus, Iguanodon, Troodon, Pachycephalosaurus, Triceratops, Archaeopteryx, Dilophosaurus (in the video game only), Guanlong and the pterosaurs Harpactognathus and Cearadactylus (the filmmakers refer to them as "Pterodactyl" and "Pterosaur" respectively). A group of pirates that sailed the seas. Among its members are: = Gutt is a Gigantopithecus who is a self-styled master and pirate captain of the high seas. His name is not based on his stomach but rather due to the long sharpened fingernails that he uses to "gut" his enemies with. He captures Manny, Sid, Diego, Scrat and Granny and attempts to make them part of his crew. His friendly demeanor when offering the herd a new life quickly vanishes when Manny refuses so he decides to throw the mammoth and his friends overboard, and he furiously vows to get revenge on them when they destroy his ship and bounty in their escape. Gutt enslaves a population of hyraxes to build a new ship for him, and strips Shira of her rank as first mate when she reveals she did not attack Manny and gives her position to Squint. When the hyraxes appear to do battle apparently backed up by Manny, Gutt leads his crew to battle, only for the hyraxes to be revealed as a distraction while Manny steals his new ship. Enraged, Gutt quickly forges a new ship out of a wall of ice, propelled by his legion of narwhals. Gutt ultimately beats Manny to his home, and takes Ellie, Peaches, and the other animals hostage. Manny turns himself in to free his wife and daughter, but Gutt goes back on his deal, stating that Manny took away everything he had, and the evil ape intended to do the same. However, the timely arrival of Louis, Peaches' friend, sparks a fierce battle between the pirates and Manny's herd. Gutt is about to fight Manny with Raz to defeat the mammoth, but Diego fights the ape himself to give Manny a better chance of winning against Raz. Gutt is well at fighting; he chases Diego up a tree on the herd's ship and knocks the saber down with the herd. Gutt has the herd cornered, but his pirates are defeated by Granny's pet whale Precious. Gutt is swift enough to dodge the blasts while Squint, Raz, Flynn, Dobson, Silas and Gupta are washed and knocked onto the side of their ship and into the sea,and the ape leaps away, now not caring for his crew. He is about to kill Ellie when Peaches knocks him onto the back of the ice. But Gutt's fury keeps him going, and leaps at Manny and refuses to let Manny return to his family. A landform rises and catapults an iceberg the two are standing on and he engages in a final battle with Manny. Gutt uses two swords while Manny uses his tusks. Gutt says the sea isn't big enough for the two giants and swings his sword at Manny, barely missing his eye. Manny charges into Gutt, knocking him down, but the ape claws at the mammoth's feet. Then seizing a firm grip, Gutt is strong enough to push the mammoth off him. Manny charges again, but Gutt jumps onto a vine and swings on several others to catch up with the floe and lands there eventually and continues the fight. Gutt pushes Manny onto the front of the floe and takes a log to finish him off, but Manny jumps onto the very back, acting like a seesaw, sending the ape flying forward. Manny catches the log and hits Gutt so hard with so much force he is sent flying rather far away out of sight. He lands in a cave river and can't swim, so he grabs a piece of ice to float on the water with, but notices fins sticking out of the water close to them where he encounters a seductive female of his species. Unfortunately, the female is actually a siren who then eats him alive, offscreen. Jeremy Renner was originally set to voice the character, but was replaced by Peter Dinklage due schedule conflict involving his movie The Bourne Legacy. Captain Gutt was initially written as a bear, but designer Peter DeSve had a hard time designing an ursine villain, thus suggesting that he be made a primate which was thought of as more versatile. = Flynn is an elephant seal who makes his first appearance in Scrat's Continental Crack-up - Part 2. Flynn is a 4,000-pound English elephant seal (although in the movie, Flynn appears to be just as big or bigger than Manny, who is considered to be 22,000 pounds) whose lack of intelligence is the source of comic relief throughout the film. When the pirates first encounter Manny's herd, Flynn inadvertently gives them directions to return to the continent, to Gutt's exasperation. The seal then joined the attack on the herd, squashing Sid underneath his bulk. Flynn likes to eat fruit and he calls the song titled "Master of the Seas" a sea shanty. When Manny's herd destroys the ship leaving the pirates to drift at sea, Flynn initially panics at the prospect of drowning, but is reminded by an annoyed Gutt that being a sea creature, he can swim. Flynn worries about Shira when all pirates minus her are present, but Gutt leaves her for dead, and Flynn propels the pirates to land aboard a small raft made of ice. In the final battle, Flynn and Gupta corner Sid and his Granny, only for the latter to summon her humongous pet whale Precious as back-up, sending the pirates running in fear. Flynn rejoins the battle against Manny, but is defeated when Precious blasts him with water. = Raz is a Procoptodon. The prehistoric Aussie is the crew's resident weapons expert, hiding an arsenal of deadly bone swords in her pouch. She served as the artillery expert on the ship, by using her powerful legs to launch the projectiles at enemies by kicking them, with Dobson's help. In the final melee against Manny's herd, she battles Manny herself, until she is blasted away by Precious. = Silas is a petrel with the feet of a Blue-footed Booby from the south of France, usually scouting out trouble ahead for the pirates. Silas informs Captain Gutt of Manny's herd's presence on the open seas, claiming their raft was a huge bounty ripe for the taking. Silas later attacks Manny personally when the mammoth is escaping the hyrax island, but Manny bats him away with his trunk. In the final battle, Silas launches Gupta at Manny's face to distract him. = Squint is a Palaeolagus. He makes his first appearance in Scrat's Continental Crack-up - Part 2. He is over confident and somewhat psychotic and hates being called adorable, and many times is berated by Gutt and Shira for trying to take authority of the crew. Squint carries a rivalry with Shira, which reaches its climax when Squint becomes Gutt's new first mate after Gutt insults Shira for failing to kill Manny and his herd. In the final battle, Squint attempts to attack Shira as she is trying to free Ellie, but Shira delays this by mocking Squint of his 'adorable nose', something which agitates him the most allowing Ellie to stomp on him. = Dobson is a Metridiochoerus, who speaks in growls, oinks, and other pig noises (although he appeared to be singing along with the crew in the "Master of the Seas" musical sequence). He teams up with Raz in firing the cannons, loading them with chunks of ice for Raz to fire with her powerful kangaroo legs, and leaps down onto the heroes's ship and corners Manny alongside her. Dobson later takes part in the final battle, fighting Crash and Eddie rodeo style,and is surprisingly able to charge into Manny and knocking him into the other ship, along with Shira, into a corner. However, just as victory was at hand, Dobson was blasted away with water by Precious along with the rest of the pirate crew. = A Bengali badger, Gupta's fur pattern on his back resembles a skull and crossbones, allowing the crew to use him as their pirate flag. He is shown to be somewhat cowardly, wishing to fly the white colors of his underbelly when the pirate ship was destroyed. In the climax of the film, Gupta initially corners Sid and Granny with Flynn, but is scared off by Granny's pet whale Precious. Gupta later is dropped onto Manny's face by Silas, distracting the mammoth long enough for Dobson to attack him, cornering the herd. However, Gupta and the rest of the shocked crew are blasted away by water from Precious. Ethan is a teenage woolly mammoth who takes a liking to Peaches, Manny and Ellie's teenage daughter, and becomes her love interest later. He's a thrill loving teenager and is openminded to Peaches being part of his group. He might have even returned her affections. But he is shown to be shallow when he tells Peaches to stop hanging around Louis and implies it would be bad to hang around them. However, when Peaches sees she's hurt her friends feelings and that Ethan and his group don't really use common sense; she decides to leave. Ethan rudely adds that it's bad enough her family is "half-possum". Peaches becomes angered and leaves them. Ethan, unlike his posse, seems to have some sense as he got the understanding of Peaches' last insults to them and might have felt guilt from hurting her feelings. After Louis helps save Peaches, Ethan and his group are impressed by his bravery. He calmly asks to hang with him and Peaches, to which Louis kindly accepts. Steffie is a teenager woolly mammoth who is the first-rate member of the Valley's popular crew, she is the alpha girl. Her friends, Katie and Meghan are always in agreement with her. She will do all that she can to keep any other ladies away from Ethan, which is why she dislikes and insults Peaches so much. She is the sassy leader of the Brat Pack. Although she is rude and unkind, sometimes she can be sweet, especially when she is with Ethan. When Louis and Peaches show their bravery fighting Gutt, she begins to warm up to them. However, it is possible that she only returned respect due to Ethan accepting them. Katie and Meghan are teenage woolly mammoths who are one of the first-rate members of the Valley's popular crew. Katie and Meghan are always in agreement with what Steffie said, they seem more like simple followers, doing anything and everything their head honcho, Steffie, does or asks. Katie is likely more important than Meghan for Steffie, as they sometimes leave Meghan alone. Katie plays into the dumb blonde stereotype and is known as the gossip girl of the Brat Pack. Sid gets a surprise with the return of his dysfunctional relatives who ditched him in the first Ice Age - Sid's father Milton, his melodramatic mother Eunice, his brother Marshall, and his hygienically challenged Uncle Fungus, all breeze into the herd just long enough to dump their 80-year-old Granny for Sid to take care of. Whether due to their eccentric behavior or just crazy behavior, the family began leaving the land, believing something was happening. They would be right as the break-up of the Pangaea continent would soon start. Despite how his family abandoned him (more than once), Sid was very enthusiastic to see them and still loved them. Eunice seemed to care for her son as she said she was worried about him when they were "separated". When Sid replies he thought they abandoned him, Marshall replies coldly that they did. Eunice insists they were still worried about him and makes her husband insist they did. However, when Eunice gets Sid to show Granny around, she quickly shows herself to be as cruel as the rest of his family. As soon as Sid turns away, they leave hastily without looking back in order to evade the moving land mass. Milton adds that Granny was simply "dead weight". Their status afterwards is unknown. Ariscratle is a saber-toothed squirrel that lives on Scratlantis. His name is a pun on the Greek philosopher Aristotle. Sirens are a shape-shifting fish-like creatures that lay on rock outcroppings near the ocean where they lure in any creatures that get close by casting images of whatever they found most attractive, be it loved ones, an attractive, potential mate or even items (such as Scrat's prized acorn). Scrat kills the siren when trying to bury it, leading the others to pretend to be acorns and chase him. At the end of the film, one lures Captain Gutt and consumes him after assuming the form of a female Gigantopithecus. They are loosely based on the sirens of Greek Mythology. Precious is a 123-foot-long Livyatan melvillei with three rows of teeth. Precious was the pet of a ground sloth dubbed Granny, though Granny's family thought her senile for mentioning Precious: indeed, Granny's family, namely Marshall, expressed that she was old and crazy for talking on about her "dead pet". Precious was alive and in the oceans, where the whale grew to an enormous size. Granny, along with her grandson Sid and his friends Manny and Diego, were confronted at cliffs near the ocean by a number of animals that took it upon themselves to be pirates, when Granny called up Precious, who rose up out of the water. Precious then opened her mouth, allowing Granny herself to walk right in, along with Sid, who was disgusted at the smell inside the whale. Later Granny and Sid use her like a submarine to fighting with the Pirates. Large, even for a whale, Precious was an immense whale and the beloved pet of Granny, who was always seen throwing food into the ocean when she was near it, so that Precious might eat. Precious was loyal to Granny, in so much that Granny could step inside the whale's mouth and commandeer her like a ship.She also has useful blowhole which can deliver a nasty attack to the pirates except Gutt who dodges it. Also she was able to swallow Manny (without eating him) when he was going to fall in the sea. Hyraxes have only been seen in Ice Age: Continental Drift. They are first seen being forced to work as slaves by Captain Gutt, as they are used to load Gutt's treasure onboard and are even used to swab the deck as part of a mop. Manny, Sid and Diego encounter the hyraxes that didn't get enslaved during a short trek on a deserted island in the jungle. Though somewhat wary of the visitors, the hyraxes quickly warm up to The Sub-Zero Heroes. Manny feels that, if the hyraxes helped them out, they could defeat the pirates; unfortunately, the hyraxes are unable to comprehend common English (though they can speak some) and, because of this, they think that Manny is asking for food. Eventually, Sid is able to (through the use of body language and some weird sounds) get through them with the idea that a team-up is necessary if the other hyraxes are to be freed and the pirates are to be trumped, much to the surprise of Manny and Diego (who is completely shocked of the idea that the hyraxes can only understand body language and weird sounds). The lead hyrax (easily distinguished by his bushy eyebrows, lighter fur coloration, and lower voice tone), who hates Gutt with a passion, rallies his forces and, upon application of war paint, decides to help the herd out, much to the herd's delight. During the attack on the pirates, the lead hyrax spearheads a cavalry attack (followed by a dive bombing rescue), which turns out to be a diversion used to trick the pirates into leaving the slave hyraxes and their ship unguarded while the herd frees the captives and takes the ship. The enslaved hyraxes take an immense liking to Diego after he frees them, as they cling to him to the point where the sabertooth is wearing an entire coat of them. As the heroes make their escape on Gutt's new ship, the Hyraxes fashion small ice boats, which they use to sail away from Gutt's tyranny to a new home in South America, taunting the pirates as they leave. The hyraxes are last seen in South America, where they have made a new home and have even carved a hyrax life-size replica of the Statue of Liberty, welcoming the other animals with open arms. A number of Pirate Rats (AKA Pie-Rats) made their homes on the "ship" of Captain Gutt, actually a giant iceberg carved into a seaworthy vessel with Gutt at its helm and a number of other animals as its crew. The rats subsided more or less well off with Gutt on board, though one of them suffered Gutt's annoyance when it was caught mocking his apish movements and thus picked up by the ape and flung off the ship. Later, once a number of seaborne mammals accidentally broke down Gutt's vessel, the rats abandoned ship, escaping into the waters below, with at least one pushed out forcefully by Scrat, another mammal taken hostage by Gutt. The giant crab is a minor character in the fourth film. The Giant crab was seen on board Manny, Diego and Sid's "ship" during a storm. It climbed on it and roared. Sid, commenting on its size (also a gag) said - "Holy Crab!" (though it sounded like he said "Holy Crap!") After trying to escape, Sid was trapped on the edge of the floating land, before attacking, the crab noticed a giant wave heading towards them, Sid, noticing it too, clutched onto the crab's leg in a terrified trance. As soon as the wave was gone, Sid tried to thank the Giant Crab for saving his life, but was horrified to see only its leg remaining and the rest of the body gone, the leg was blown away again by strong winds. A Mammoth Christmas is a holiday special that aired in 2011 on FOX and was then released to DVD and Blu-ray. Prancer is a reindeer character in the special. Santa Claus is a character in the special. The mini sloths are characters in the special as Christmas elves. 