The following is a list of integrals (antiderivative functions) of rational functions. For other types of functions, see lists of integrals. Any rational function can be integrated using partial fractions in integration, by decomposing the rational function into a sum of functions of the form: , and More generally, (Cavalieri's quadrature formula) For The resulting integrands are of the same form as the original integrand, so these reduction formulas can be repeatedly applied to drive the exponents m and p toward 0. These reduction formulas can be used for integrands having integer and/or fractional exponents. The resulting integrands are of the same form as the original integrand, so these reduction formulas can be repeatedly applied to drive the exponents m, n and p toward 0. These reduction formulas can be used for integrands having integer and/or fractional exponents. Special cases of these reductions formulas can be used for integrands of the form by setting B to 0. The resulting integrands are of the same form as the original integrand, so these reduction formulas can be repeatedly applied to drive the exponents m, p and q toward 0. These reduction formulas can be used for integrands having integer and/or fractional exponents. Special cases of these reductions formulas can be used for integrands of the form and by setting m and/or B to 0. The resulting integrands are of the same form as the original integrand, so these reduction formulas can be repeatedly applied to drive the exponents m and p toward 0. These reduction formulas can be used for integrands having integer and/or fractional exponents. Special cases of these reductions formulas can be used for integrands of the form when by setting m to 0. The resulting integrands are of the same form as the original integrand, so these reduction formulas can be repeatedly applied to drive the exponents m and p toward 0. These reduction formulas can be used for integrands having integer and/or fractional exponents. Special cases of these reductions formulas can be used for integrands of the form and by setting m and/or B to 0. The resulting integrands are of the same form as the original integrand, so these reduction formulas can be repeatedly applied to drive the exponents m and p toward 0. These reduction formulas can be used for integrands having integer and/or fractional exponents. Special cases of these reductions formulas can be used for integrands of the form when by setting m to 0. The resulting integrands are of the same form as the original integrand, so these reduction formulas can be repeatedly applied to drive the exponents m and p toward 0. These reduction formulas can be used for integrands having integer and/or fractional exponents. Special cases of these reductions formulas can be used for integrands of the form and by setting m and/or B to 0. 