In probability theory, a logit-normal distribution is a probability distribution of a random variable whose logit has a normal distribution. If Y is a random variable with a normal distribution, and P is the logistic function, then X = P(Y) has a logit-normal distribution; likewise, if X is logit-normally distributed, then Y = logit(X)= log (X/(1-X)) is normally distributed. It is also known as the logistic normal distribution, which often refers to a multinomial logit version (e.g.). A variable might be modeled as logit-normal if it is a proportion, which is bounded by zero and one, and where values of zero and one never occur. The probability density function (PDF) of a logit-normal distribution, for 0 x 1, is: where and are the mean and standard deviation of the variables logit (by definition, the variables logit is normally distributed). The density obtained by changing the sign of is symmetrical, in that it is equal to f(1-x;-,), shifting the mode to the other side of 0.5 (the midpoint of the (0,1) interval). The moments of the logit-normal distribution have no analytic solution. However, they can be estimated by numerical integration. When the derivative of the density equals 0 then the location of the mode x satisfies the following equation: The logistic normal distribution is a generalization of the logitnormal distribution to D-dimensional probability vectors by taking a logistic transformation of a multivariate normal distribution. The probability density function is: where denotes a vector of the first (D-1) components of and denotes the simplex of D-dimensional probability vectors. This follows from applying the additive logistic transformation to map a multivariate normal random variable to the simplex: The unique inverse mapping is given by: The logistic normal distribution is a more flexible alternative to the Dirichlet distribution in that it can capture correlations between components of probability vectors. It also has the potential to simplify statistical analyses of compositional data by allowing one to answer questions about log-ratios of the components of the data vectors. One is often interested in ratios rather than absolute component values. The probability simplex is a bounded space, making standard techniques that are typically applied to vectors in less meaningful. Aitchison described the problem of spurious negative correlations when applying such methods directly to simplicial vectors. However, mapping compositional data in through the inverse of the additive logistic transformation yields real-valued data in . Standard techniques can be applied to this representation of the data. This approach justifies use of the logistic normal distribution, which can thus be regarded as the "Gaussian of the simplex". The Dirichlet and logistic normal distributions are never exactly equal for any choice of parameters. However, Aitchison described a method for approximating a Dirichlet with a logistic normal such that their KullbackLeibler divergence (KL) is minimized: This is minimized by: Using moment properties of the Dirichlet distribution, the solution can be written in terms of the digamma and trigamma functions: This approximation is particularly accurate for large . In fact, one can show that for , we have that . 