Majhighariani Institute of Technology and Science (or MITS) is located in Rayagada, Orissa, India. It was started in 1999 by the Basantdevi Charitable Trust. Its name came from the Goddess Majhighariani, deity of Rayagada. The college was approved by the All India Council for Technical Education (AICTE) and the government of Orissa. The college is affiliated to Biju Patnaik University of Technology (BPUT), Rourkela and Berhampur University. It is an ISO 9001:2008 certified premier institute of eastern India. It imparts quality education using well experienced, dynamic faculty members and high-tech infrastructure. It is the only research oriented and high end technology implement institute of the region. The campus is 12 km from Rayagada on the State Highway. Location in Google Map The redoubtable Basanta Devi Charitable Trust derives its name from the venerable Late Smt. Basanta Devi, the beloved mother of Sri Balakrishna Panda & Sri Subash Chandra Panda, its chief architects, Managing Trustee & Founder Trustee respectively. The Trust has been spreading education among the neglected and the down trodden in the far-flung tribal areas of the state, right from the Primary up to the Post Graduate level. It is a trust for which uplift of the poor has virtually became a passion. Majhighariani Institute Of Technology & Science, Rayagada (MITS) was started in the year 1999 under the patronage of Basanta Devi Charitable Trust in the memory of the Panda family. MITS is a link in the long chain of philanthropic accomplishments of the trust in the form of primary and high schools, junior and degree colleges and hospitals in the far flung tribal areas of the KBK districts in Orissa. Started in a modest campus at Bhakuruguda on the way from Rayagada to Jaykaypur, MITS has developed into a sprawling campus of fifty acres in a picturesque location at Bhujbal, adjoining the State Highway No. 7 between Jeypore and Berhampur. It drew its name from the Goddess Majhighariani, the reigning deity of Rayagada. It has well planned buildings, which includes multi-storeyed main building housing classrooms, laboratories, library, seminar hall, examination hall, offices, etc. and 8 sloping roofed but permanent structures housing duty laboratories, drawing hall, canteen, auditorium, etc. It has also an expansive playground and a Gayatri Temple in the campus. MITS has hostel facilities for both boys and girls separately. MITS Boys Hostel is in the campus whereas the Girls Hostel is in the Rayagada Town. It has a fleet of College buses for the transport of students and faculties. Academically too, MITS grew commensurately with time. Having started with a mere three disciplines of engineering at B.Tech level, it now has ECE, EEE, CSE, IT, BIOTECH, ME, CE, EE. To mention, MITS is the 1st institution to have started the B.Tech course in Boitechnology in the entire state of Orissa. It added M.Sc. Course in Boitechnology and Microbiology, Industrial Biotechnology and Bioinformatics & M.Tech Course in Electronic Information System. In fact, the discipline of Biotechnology is a silver lining on the development of MITS. The Biotechnology Department has a state-of-art laboratories. Recently, MITS has entered into the area of Industrial Biotechnology. Having envisaged to state a Bio-Diesel Project, it is now prompting and spreading cultivation of Jatropha plants in large areas in various parts in Orissa. The Biodiesel Project will have a plant for the extraction of Bio-crude from Jatropha seeds, for the sale of which, MITS entered into a MoU with the British Company - D1 Oils Plc., together with the condition of placement opportunities for the pass-outs of MITS. In addition to classroom instruction, MITS encourages its students to inculcate habits of discipline, Godmindedness and sports & game. It provided slots in the timetable for student seminars, group discussion and mock interviews inhouse itself. It also invites outside agencies to train the students for development of their personality, communication skills and professional aptitude. Further, MITS invites companies and consultants for the placement of its students in campus and sends them off-campus too. The main drive behind MITS is Mr. Balakrishna Panda an enlightened visionary, who is the Managing Trustee cum Chairman. B.Tech Courses: 1. Biotechnology 2. Computer Science 3. Electronics & Communication 4. Electrical & Electronics 5. Electrical 6. Information Technology 7. Mechanical 8. Civil M.Tech Courses: 1. Biotechnology 2. Computer Science 3. Electronics & Information System 4. Industrial Engineering M.Sc. Courses: 1. Biotechnology 2. Industrial Biotechnology 3. Microbiology 4. Bioinformatics 5. Computer Science Bachelor in Computer Applications B.Sc. Biotechnology (Hons.) Department of Basic Science & Humanities (Department of Engg. Mathematics, Department of Engg. Physics, Department of Engg. Chemistry, Department of Communicative English, Department of Management Studies) Department of Biotechnology,BIotechnology Department Department of Civil Engineering, Department of Computer Science & Engineering and Information Technology, Department of Electronics & Communication Engineering, Department of Electrical & Electronics Engineering, Department of Mechanical Engineering 