The member states of the African Union are the 54 sovereign states that have ratified or acceded to the Constitutive Act of the African Union to become member states to the African Union (AU). The AU replaced the Organisation of African Unity (OAU), and AU membership was open to all OAU member states. From an original membership of 36 states when the OAU was established on 25 May 1963, there have been eighteen successive enlargements the largest occurring on 18 July 1975 when four states joined. South Sudan is the newest member state, having joined on 27 July 2011. Currently, one member state, Central African Republic, is suspended due to a coup d'tat and political struggles. The only African United Nations member state which could join, or more precisely re-activate its membership, is Morocco, which withdrew following the organizations acceptance of the Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic, whose status is disputed, as a member state. Spain, primarily a European country, maintains sovereignty over several cities on the African mainland and the Canary Islands off the coast, but is only accredited to the African Union. The African Union is composed of fifty two republics and two kingdoms. The total population of the AU is 1,068,444,000 (2013). Membership suspended Membership withdrawn South Africa joined on 6 June 1994 after the end of the apartheid and the April 1994 general election. South Sudan, which seceded from Sudan on 9 July 2011, joined the AU on 27 July 2011. Following the announcement of the results of the South Sudanese independence referendum, an official AU statement noted "the AU will be keen, at the end of the interim period, on 9 July 2011, to welcome into its ranks the 54th member state of the Union". It's the AU's most recent member state. Morocco is the only other African Nation (other than dependencies that are considered within the African Continent) that could join (or, more precisely, re-activate its membership). Currently, one member state, Central African Republic, is suspended due to a coup d'tat and political struggles. The AU is composed of fifty-two republics, and two kingdoms. In its history more monarchies existed but they were abolished. 