The Royal Norwegian Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Norwegian (Bokml): Det kongelige Utenriksdepartement; Norwegian (Nynorsk): Det kongelege Utanriksdepartement) is the foreign ministry of the Kingdom of Norway. It was established on June 7, 1905, the same day the Parliament of Norway (Stortinget) decided to dissolve the personal union with Sweden. The ministry is headed by Minister of Foreign Affairs, currently Brge Brende who is minister in the Solberg's Cabinet that has governed since 16 October 2013. Between 1983 and October 2013, the ministry also had a Minister of International Development but this position was abolished by the Solberg's Cabinet and the foreign minister became the sole head of the ministry. The Norwegian Ministry of Foreign Affairs is organised with 110 foreign missions and three subordinate organisations: Norwegian Agency for Development Cooperation (Norad), FK Norway (the Norwegian "Peace Corps") and the development country investment fund Norfund. The Ministry and foreign missions have a total staff of approx. 2,400. Minister of Foreign Affairs Brge Brende State Secretaries Brd Glad Pedersen, Hans Brattskar, Ingvild Nss Stub (all Conservative). Political Advisor Ingrid Skjtskift (Conservative) Secretariat of the Minister of Foreign Affairs Communication Unit Legal Adviser The top public servant is the Secretary General (utenriksrd) with an Assistant Secretary General as substitute (the latter also with a special responsibility for international development issues). The Ministry was reorganised on June 19, 2006 - and currently has eight departments, each headed by a Director General (ekspedisjonssjef): Department for European Affairs and Trade Policy Department for Security Policy and the High North Department for Regional Affairs and Development Department for UN, Peace and Humanitarian Affairs Legal Affairs Department Promotion and Protocol Department Human and Financial Resources Department Internal and External Services Department Norfund Norwegian Agency for Development Cooperation (Norad) Fredskorpset In 2009, the ministry permitted the sale of military communications equipment to Libya, from a Norwegian company (Teleplan Globe) through General Dynamics (in Britain). 