Nepali English (Nenglish language) is a local form and accent of English language spoken in Nepal. Many Nepali people speak English language as a second language. This dialect is classified as a non-standard dialect. It has no legal value, and is quite similar to Indian English Nepali accents vary greatly. Some Nepali speak English with an accent very close to a Standard British (Received Pronunciation) accent (though not the same); others lean toward a more 'vernacular', native-tinted, accent for their English speech. The role of English within the complex multilingual society of Nepal is far from straightforward: it is used across the country, by speakers with various degrees of proficiency; the grammar and phraseology may mimic that of the speaker's first language. While Nepalese speakers of English use idioms peculiar to their homeland, often literal translations of words and phrases from their native languages, this is far less common in proficient speakers, and the grammar itself tends to be quite close to that of Standard English. The numeral system of Nenglish is the South Asian numbering system. The South Asian numbering system is preferred for digit grouping. When written in words, or when spoken, numbers less than 100,000/100 000 are expressed just as they are in Standard English. Numbers including and beyond 100,000 / 100 000 are expressed in a subset of the Indian numbering system. Thus, the following scale is used: Larger numbers are generally expressed as multiples of the above. There are few affection of nouns in Nenglish. In most of the languages spoken in Nepal, both brother and cousin are referred to as brother. There is no specific word for cousin. So people use the term "own brother" to refer to "brother" and "not own brother" to refer to "cousin". In most of the languages spoken in Nepal, there are specific words for aunties and uncles too. e.g. :-In Nepali,father's sister-(fupu), mother's sister- (saani aamaa),etc. So people especially use the native names for referring Aunt/Uncle. 