Northern Kurdish ( ; kurdiya jorn), also called Kurmanji (; Kurmanc), is a group of Kurdish dialects predominantly spoken in southeast Turkey, northwest Iran, northern Iraq and northern Syria. It is the most widespread dialect group of the Kurdish languages. While Kurdish is generally categorized as one of the Northwestern Iranian languages along with Baluchi, it also shares many traits with Southwestern Iranian languages like Persian, apparently due to longstanding and intense historical contacts, and some authorities have gone so far as to classify Kurmanji as a Southwestern or "southern" Iranian language. Northern Kurdish dialects, which uses the Latin script, is the commonest dialect group of the Kurdish language, spoken by 80% of all Kurds. The earliest textual record of the Kurdish language dates to the 16th century. Kurmanji is the ceremonial language of Yezidism. The sacred book Mishefa Re (the "Black Book") and all prayers are written and spoken in Kurmanji. Kurmanji is a recognized minority language of education in Armenia, where most Kurds are Yazidi. Northern Kurdish forms a dialect continuum of great variability. Loosely, five dialect areas can be distinguished: Northwestern Kurmanji, spoken in the Kahramanmara (in Kurmanji: Mera), Malatya (Melet) and Sivas (Swaz) provinces of Turkey. Southwestern Kurmanji, spoken in the Adyaman (Semsr), Gaziantep (Entab) and anlurfa provinces of Turkey and the Aleppo Governorate of Syria. Northern Kurmanji or Serhed , spoken mainly in the Ar (Agir), Erzurum (Erzerom) and Mu (M) provinces of Turkey, as well as adjacent areas. Southern Kurmanji, spoken in the Al-Hasakah Governorate in Syria, the Sinjar distinct in Iraq, and in several adjacent parts of Turkey centering on the Mardin and Batman provinces. Southeastern Kurmanji or Badn, spoken in the Hakkri province of Turkey and Dohuk Governorate of Iraqi Kurdistan. Anatolian Kurmanji is spoken in central Anatolia, especially in Konya, Ankara, Aksaray, by Anatolian Kurds The most distinctive of these is Badn. 