The North Dakota Republican Party (ND GOP) is the North Dakota affiliate of the United States Republican Party. The Party's platform is generally conservative. The North Dakota Republican Party is strongly in control of the state's politics. The Party holds nearly all statewide positions in addition to having a supermajority in both houses of the state legislature, over the North Dakota Democratic-NPL Party. The current party chairman is Robert Harms. The state Republican Party has always been a major force in state politics, in many cases having a dominant position. Founded in 1889, the Party initially dominated all state politics for the state's first 20 years of existence, with the exception of a brief period from 1893 to 1894 in which the North Dakota Democratic-Independent Party briefly overthrew the Republican Party. In the early 20th century, the Party was effectively divided into two groups that nominated candidates on the Republican ticket, the progressive Non-Partisan League (NPA) and the conservative Independent Voters Association (IVA). This period ended when the NPL merged with the state Democratic Party, and the IVA effectively became known as the Republican Party. The Party holds its convention in the spring of election years, usually rotating the convention between four of the state's largest cities: Bismarck, Fargo, Grand Forks, and Minot. Thomas S. Kleppe - former United States Secretary of the Interior Milton Young - United States Senator who served as President pro tempore for a day Mark Andrews - former United States Senator Ed Schafer - former Governor of North Dakota and former United States Secretary of Agriculture Allen Olson - former Governor of North Dakota The North Dakota Republican Party controls all nine of the statewide offices and holds supermajorities in both the North Dakota Senate and the North Dakota House of Representatives. Republicans also hold one of the state's U.S. Senate seats and the state's At-Large congressional district. = John Hoeven = Kevin Cramer, At-Large District Governor: Jack Dalrymple Lieutenant Governor: Drew Wrigley Secretary of State: Al Jaeger Attorney General: Wayne Stenehjem Insurance Commissioner: Adam Hamm Tax Commissioner: Cory Fong Auditor: Bob Peterson North Dakota State Treasurer: Kelly Schmidt North Dakota Agriculture Commissioner: Doug Goehring Public Service Commissioners: Brian Kalk, Julie Fedorchak, Randy Christmann President Pro Tem of the Senate: Rich Wardner Senate Majority Leader: Rich Wardner Speaker of the House: Wesley Belter House Majority Leader: Al Carlson 