Official bilingualism is the policy adopted by some states of recognizing two languages as official and producing all official documents, and handling all correspondence and official dealings, including court procedure, in the two said languages. It is distinct from personal bilingualism, the capacity of a person to speak two languages. Afghanistan uses Dari (or Afghan Persian) and Pashto as official languages. Many citizens are bilingual. These two languages account for 85% of Afghanis' native tongues. In Belarus, Russian is far more common than Belarusian and Section 17 of the Constitution designates both as official languages. The official languages of Burundi are the local Kirundi language as well as the colonial French. Cameroon is extremely diverse linguistically and uses English and French as official languages. In Canada English and French have special legal status over other languages in Canadas courts, parliament and administration. At the provincial level, New Brunswick is the only official bilingual province and only Quebec is officially unilingual (French only). In practice, all provinces, including Quebec, offer some bilingual services and some education in both official languages up to the high school level. English and French are official languages in all three territories (because they are federally administered). In addition, Inuktitut is also an official language in Nunavut, and nine aboriginal languages have official status in the Northwest Territories. Out of 120 languages spoken in the Central African Republic, French and the Ngbandi-based creole Sango. Citizens of Chad speak over 120 languages and the standardized Chadian Arabic serves as the lingua franca with colonial language French also being official. Cook Islands Island nation of Cyprus has had Greek and Turkish as its languages since the 1960 Constitution (Article 3, section 1). The usage of either language is complicated by the political dispute that lead tot he creation of the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus. Djibouti East Timor In Finland, Finnish and Swedish are both considered "national languages". Municipalities of Finland are divided into three categories: unilingual Swedish, unilingual Finnish or bilingual. Finnish is the maternal language of about 90% of the population, and the bilingual or swedophone population is concentrated to the coastal areas of Ostrobothnia and Southwest Finland. The autonomous province of land is officially unilingual (Swedish). Both Swedish and Finnish are compulsory school subjects. Haiti Hong Kong (English and Chinese/Cantonese) India Iraq Ireland Israel Kazakhstan Kenya Kiribati Kosovo Kyrgyzstan Lesotho Macau (Portuguese and Chinese/Cantonese) Madagascar Malta Marshall Islands Morocco New Zealand Niue Pakistan Palau Paraguay Philippines Puerto Rico Samoa Somalia Sri Lanka Sudan Swaziland Tanzania Tonga Tuvalu Uganda Belgium Bolivia Comoros Equitorial Guinea Eritrea Fiji Luxembourg New Zealand Norway Papua New Guinea Peru Rwanda Seychelles South Africa (11 official languages with equal status) Singapore Switzerland Vanuatu Zimbabwe Sovereign Military Order of Malta 