The Office of Scientific and Technical Information (OSTI) is a component of the Office of Science within the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE). The Energy Policy Act PL 109-58, Section 982, called out the responsibility of OSTI: The Secretary, through the Office of Scientific and Technical Information, shall maintain with the Department publicly available collections of scientific and technical information resulting from research, development, demonstration, and commercial applications activities supported by the Department. OSTI provides access to energy, science, and technology information through publicly available web-based systems, with supporting tools and technologies to enable information search, retrieval and re-use. Information Bridge: Department of Energy Scientific and Technical Information provides access to over 298,000 fully searchable, full-text technical reports documenting the results of DOE-sponsored research. DOE R&D Accomplishments highlights outcomes of past DOE research and development which have had significant economic impact, improved peoples lives, or been widely recognized as a remarkable advance in science. DOE Data Explorer searches collections of DOE scientific research data, such as computer simulations, figures and plots, interactive maps, multimedia, numeric files and scientific images. DOepatents provides a searchable database of patent information resulting from DOE-sponsored research and development. DOE Green Energy provides a portal to green energy DOE technical report literature about various forms of green energy, including solar, wind, bioenergy, and others. Energy Science and Technology Software Center provides a searchable database of DOE's centralized software management facility. Energy Citations Database offers over 2.3 million bibliographic records of DOE scientific and technical information from 1943 to the present, with links to full-text when available. Science Conference Proceedings provides single-query searching of conference papers and proceedings on multiple websites and databases. E-Print Network: Research Communications for Scientists and Engineers provides single-query searching of over 5.5 million e-print documents in basic and applied sciences residing on over 34,000 websites, as well as a deep web search across 52 major e-print databases. EDUconnections, highlights university research departments and libraries across the nation to increase awareness of DOE's valuable scientific and technical information. EnergyFiles, the Energy Science and Technology Virtual Library, provides single-query access to over 500 databases and websites containing information and resources pertaining to science and technology of interest to DOE, with an emphasis on the physical sciences. Science Accelerator provides single-query searching of important information resources of DOE scientific and technical information. ScienceEducation.gov is a search engine for federally funded Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) education resources. Science.gov OSTI hosts this USA.gov science portal in collaboration with 17 organizations within 13 Federal science agencies. These agencies are also members of CENDI, a cooperative group of scientific and technical information (STI) managers from the 13 federal agencies and programs. Science.gov provides a gateway to over 2,100 websites and offers deep web searching of more than 50 databases containing science information and R&D results. WorldWideScience.org provides a global science gateway through a multilateral partnership to enable federated searching of national and international scientific databases and portals.