Passaddhi is a Pali noun (Sankrit: prasrabhi, Tibetan: ,Tibetan Wylie: shin tu sbyang ba) that has been translated as "calmness," "tranquillity," "repose" and "serenity." The associated verb is passambhati (to calm down, to be quiet). In Buddhism, passaddhi refers to tranquillity of the body, speech, thoughts and consciousness on the path to enlightenment. As part of cultivated mental factors, passaddhi is preceded by rapture (pti) and precedes concentration (samdhi). Passaddhi is identified as a wholesome factor in the following canonical contexts: the seven factors of enlightenment (sambojjhangas) meditative absorptions (jhanani) transcendental dependent arising (lokuttara-paticcasamuppada) In various Buddhist canonical schema, the calming of the body, speech and various mental factors is associated with gladness (pmojja, pmujja), rapture (pti), and pleasure (sukha) and leads to the concentration needed for release from suffering. Calming (passambhaya) bodily and mental formations is the culmination of each of the first two tetrads of meditation instructions in the Pali Canon's famed Anapanasati Sutta: As indicated in the prior and future sections and highlighted here, a number of discourses identify the concurrent arising of the following wholesome mental states with the development of mindfulness (sati): pmojja or pmujja ("gladness" or "joy") pti ("rapture" or "joy") passaddhi ("tranquility" or "serenity" or "calm") sukho ("happiness" or "pleasure"). By establishing mindfulness, one overcomes the Five Hindrances (paca nvarai), gives rise to gladness, rapture, pleasure and tranquillizes the body (kyo passambhati); such bodily tranquillity (passaddhakyo) leads to higher states of concentration (samdhi) as indicated in this Pali-recorded discourse ascribed to the Buddha: Similarly, with the realization of wisdom (or, as below, "discernment") (pa) these wholesome states arise: Passaddhi is the fifth of seven factors of enlightenment (sambojjhanga) that lead to deliverance from suffering. Among the factors of enlightenment, serenity (passadhi) is preceded by rapture (pti) and leads to concentration (samdhi) as further described by the Buddha in the Anapanasati Sutta: "For one enraptured at heart, the body grows calm and the mind grows calm. When the body & mind of a monk enraptured at heart grow calm, then serenity as a factor for awakening becomes aroused. He develops it, and for him it goes to the culmination of its development. "For one who is at ease his body calmed the mind becomes concentrated. When the mind of one who is at ease his body calmed becomes concentrated, then concentration as a factor for awakening becomes aroused. He develops it, and for him it goes to the culmination of its development." In describing one's progressive steps through the absorptions (jhanani), the Buddha identifies six sequential "calmings" (passaddhis): With the first jhana, speech (vc) is calmed. With the second jhana, applied and sustained thought (vitakka-vicr) is calmed. With the third jhana, rapture (pti) is calmed. With the fourth jhana, in-and-out breathing (asssa-passs) is calmed. With the cessation of perception and feeling, perception and feeling (sa-vedan) are calmed. With the ending of mental fermentations (sava), lust, hatred and delusion (rga-dosa-moha) are calmed. Passaddhi is a "supporting condition" for the "destruction of the cankers" (sava-khaye), that is, the achievement of Arahantship. More specifically, in describing a set of supporting conditions that move one from samsaric suffering (see Dependent Origination) to destruction of the cankers, the Buddha describes the following progression of conditions: suffering (dukkha) faith (saddh) joy (pmojja, pmujja) rapture (pti) tranquillity (passaddhi) happiness (sukha) concentration (samdhi) knowledge and vision of things as they are (yathbhta-na-dassana) disenchantment with worldly life (nibbid) dispassion (virga) freedom, release, emancipation, deliverance (vimutti) knowledge of destruction of the cankers (sava-khaye-na) In the Pali literature, this sequence that enables one to transcend worldly suffering is referred to as the "transcendental dependent arising" (lokuttara-paticcasamuppada). In the Abhidhamma Pitaka's Dhammasangani, the first chapter identifies 56 states of material-world consciousness that are wholesome, including "lightness of sense and thought," upon which the text elaborates: What on that occasion is repose of sense (kaypassaddhi)? The serenity, the composure which there is on that occasion, the calming, the tranquillizing, the tranquillity of the skandhas of feeling, perception and syntheses this is the serenity of sense that there then is. What on that occasion is serenity of thought (cittapassaddhi)? The serenity, the composure which there is on that occasion, the calming, the tranquillizing, the tranquillity of the skandha of intellect this is the serenity of thought that there then is. Passaddhi is referenced in the Visuddhimagga and other Pali commentarial (atthakatha) texts. In the Visuddhimagga, the enlightenment factors (bojjhangas) are discussed in the context of skills for developing absorption (jhna). In particular, the Visuddhimagga recommends that in order to develop the skill of "restrain[ing] the mind on an occasion when it should be restrained" (such as when it is "agitated through over-energeticness, etc. "), one should develop tranquillity (passaddhi), concentration (samdhi) and equanimity (upekkh). Towards this end, the Visuddhimagga identifies seven things from which bodily and mental tranquillity arise: "using superior food" "living in a good climate" "maintaining a pleasant posture" "keeping to the middle" "avoidance of violent persons" "cultivation of persons tranquil in body" "resoluteness upon that [tranquillity]."