The Peru national football team has experienced a series of indiscipline scandals since the 1990s. In 1996, during the 1998 FIFA World Cup qualification season, players Nolberto Solano, Roberto Farfn, Percy Olivares, and Juan Marengo were caught drinking beer and playing music during the time in which they were supposed to be preparing for a qualifiers game against Uruguay. The football players were found along with volleyball players Jssica Tejada and Margarita Delgado. Peru failed the qualify for the 1998 World Cup. In 2002, during the 2002 FIFA World Cup qualifiers, a Salsa orchestra in the VIDENA was caught entertaining the players with alcohol and music during their concentration. Additionally, women were found to have entered the concentration zone. Peru failed to qualify for this World Cup. During the 2010 FIFA World Cup qualification season, a corruption and indiscipline scandal shook the national team as Peruvian journalists Jaime Bayly and Magaly Medina revealed that a series of Peru's most recognized players, including Claudio Pizarro, Andrs Mendoza, Santiago Acasiete, Paolo Guerrero, and Jefferson Farfn, were seen at nightclubs and parties only days before the team was scheduled to play qualifier matches. Several players were banned from playing for the national team while others were put under investigation. The national press named the scandal in reference to the hotel in which the players were concentrating prior to the match. Ironically, banned players such as Pizarro and Farfn ended up with successful 2009 seasons while the national team suffered shame in the bottom of the South American qualifiers for the 2010 World Cup. On October 12, 2010, following a friendly game against Panama, journalists from the Central American country revealed photos in which three Peru national football team players were discovered breaking their concentration in order to attend a casino. Two of the players were identified as the young skillful attacking midfielder Reimond Manco and the veteran defender John Galliquio. The identity of the third player was kept a mystery until local Peruvian sports newspaper El Bocn revealed it had been famous forward Jefferson Farfn. The player was accused by Manco and Galliquio of inciting the group of three to leave the concentration, despite the orders of Uruguayan coach Sergio Markarian to stay in their rooms for the remainder of their stay in Panama. 