Queen Mab is a fairy referred to in Shakespeare's play Romeo and Juliet. She later appears in other poetry and literature, and in various guises in drama and cinema. In the play her activity is described in a famous speech by Mercutio written originally in prose and often adapted into iambic pentameter, in which she is described as a miniature creature who drives her chariot into the noses and into the brains of sleeping people to compel them to experience dreams of wish-fulfillment. She would also "plague" "ladies' lips" "with blisters", which is thought a reference to the plague or to herpes simplex. She is also described as a midwife to help sleepers 'give birth' to their dreams. She may be a figure borrowed from folklore, and though she is often associated with the Irish Medb in popular culture and has been suggested by historian Thomas Keightley to be from Habundia, a more likely origin for her name would be from Mabel and the Middle English derivative "Mabily" (as used by Chaucer) all from the Latin amabilis ("lovable"). "O, then, I see Queen Mab hath been with you. She is the fairies midwife, and she comes In shape no bigger than an agate-stone On the fore-finger of an alderman, Drawn with a team of little atomies Athwart men's noses as they lies asleep; Her wagon-spokes made of long spinners legs, The cover of the wings of grasshoppers, The traces of the smallest spider's web, The collars of the moonshine's wat'ry beams, Her whip of cricket's bone; the lash of film; Her waggoner a small grey-coated gnat, Not half so big as a round little worm Pricked from the lazy finger of a maid: Her chariot is an empty hazelnut Made by the joiner squirrel or old grub, Time out o mind the fairies coachmakers. And in this state she gallops night by night Through lovers brains, and then they dream of love; Oer courtiers knees, that dream on court'sies straight, Oer lawyers fingers, who straight dream on fees, Oer ladies' lips, who straight on kisses dream, Which oft the angry Mab with blisters plagues, Because their breaths with sweetmeats tainted are: Sometime she gallops oer a courtier's nose, And then dreams he of smelling out a suit; And sometime comes she with a tithe-pig's tail Tickling a parson's nose as a lies asleep, Then dreams, he of another benefice: Sometime she driveth oer a soldier's neck, And then dreams he of cutting foreign throats, Of breaches, ambuscadoes, Spanish blades, Of healths five-fathom deep; and then anon Drums in his ear, at which he starts and wakes, And being thus frighted swears a prayer or two And sleeps again. This is that very Mab That plaits the manes of horses in the night, And bakes the elflocks in foul sluttish hairs, Which once untangled, much misfortune bodes: This is the hag, when maids lie on their backs, That presses them and learns them first to bear, Making them women of good carriage: This is she" Mercutio in Romeo and Juliet, Act I, scene IV After her literary debut in Romeo and Juliet, she appears in works of seventeenth-century poetry, notably Ben Jonson's "The Entertainment at Althorp" and Michael Drayton's "Nymphidia". In Poole's work Parnassus, Mab is described as the Queen of the Fairies and consort to Oberon, Emperor of the Fairies. "Queen Mab" is a 1750 pantomime by Henry Woodward (English actor). Queen Mab: A Philosophical Poem (1813) is the title of the first large poetic work written by the famous English Romantic poet, Percy Bysshe Shelley (17921822). In J. M. Barrie's The Little White Bird (1902) Queen Mab lives in Kensington Gardens and grants Peter Pan (who has learned he is a boy, so he can no longer fly) his wish to fly again. Herman Melville's epic American novel Moby Dick includes a chapter called "Queen Mab". The 31st chapter of Melville's work is entitled such because it describes a dream by Captain Ahab's second mate, Stubb. American philosopher George Santayana wrote a short piece entitled "Queen Mab" which appeared in his 1922 book Soliloquies in England and Later Soliloquies. This particular soliloquy considers English literature as an indirect form of self-expression in which the English writer "will dream of what Queen Mab makes other people dream" rather than revealing him or herself. In several of Jim Butcher's The Dresden Files books, Queen Mab is a primary antagonist. In the first episode of season four of HBO's original series "True Blood", Queen Mab (portrayed by Rebecca Wisocky) is the Queen of Faerie who centuries ago ordered the fae to retreat to the Plane of Faerie in the wake of vampire aggression. Under her orders, humans with fae blood (including Sookie Stackhouse) are being drawn into Faerie as well. When Sookie rebels against her and escapes back to the mortal realm, Queen Mab seals the Faerie portals for good, trapping the half-fae with her and a handful of true fae in Bon Temps. Although not connected with him in the original source material, Queen Mab has been featured in media series featuring Merlin. She is portrayed by Miranda Richardson in the 1998 TV miniseries Merlin, serving as prominent antagonist to the title character; she is the dark twin to the Lady of the Lake. The 2008 TV series Merlin features her as a character in an episode of the show's fifth season, which portrays her as a diminutive green fairy. Though the Disney cartoon Gargoyles was canceled before Queen Mab could appear, creator Greg Weisman says that she is the mother of the series' version of Oberon and would eventually have been an antagonist had the show continued. 