In probability theory and statistics, the Rademacher distribution (which is named after Hans Rademacher) is a discrete probability distribution where a random variate X has a 50% chance of being either +1 or -1. A series of Rademacher distributed variables can be regarded as a simple symmetrical random walk where the step size is 1. The probability mass function of this distribution is It can be also written as a probability density function, in terms of the Dirac delta function, as van Zuijlen has proved the following result. Let Xi be a set of independent Rademacher distributed random variables. Then The bound is sharp and better than that which can be derived from the normal distribution (approximately Pr > 0.31). Let { Xi } be a set of random variables with a Rademacher distribution. Let { ai } be a sequence of real numbers. Then where ||a||2 is the Euclidean norm of the sequence { ai }, t > 0 is a real number and Pr(Z) is the probability of event Z. Let Y = Xiai and let Y be an almost surely convergent series in a Banach space. The for t > 0 and s 1 we have for some constant c. Let p be a positive real number. Then where c1 and c2 are constants dependent only on p. For p 1 Another bound on the sums is known as the Bernstein inequalities. The Rademacher distribution has been used in bootstrapping. The Rademacher distribution can be used to show that normally distributed and uncorrelated does not imply independent. Random vectors with components sampled independently from the Rademacher distribution are useful for various stochastic approximations, for example: The Hutchinson trace estimator, which can be used to efficiently approximate the trace of a matrix of which the elements are not directly accessible, but rather implicitly defined via matrix-vector products. SPSA, a computationally cheap, derivative-free, stochastic gradient approximation, useful for numerical optimization. Bernoulli distribution: If X has a Rademacher distribution, then has a Bernoulli(1/2) distribution. Laplace distribution: If X has a Rademacher distribution and Y ~ Exp(), then XY ~ Laplace(0, 1/). 