Radioisotope renography is a form of kidney imaging involving radioisotopes. The two most common radiolabelled pharmaceutical agents used are Tc99m-MAG3 (mercaptoacetyltriglycine) and Tc99m-DTPA (diethylenetriaminepentacetate). Some other radiolabelled pharmaceuticals are EC (ethylcysteine) and 131-Iodine labelled OIH (ortho-iodohippurate). MAG3 is a better diagnostic agent than Tc-99m-DTPA, particularly in neonates, patients with impaired function, and patients with suspected obstruction. The MAG3 clearance is highly correlated with the effective renal plasma flow (ERPF), and the MAG3 clearance can be used as an independent measure of renal function. After intravenous administration, about 40-50% of the MAG3 in the blood is extracted by the proximal tubules with each pass through the kidneys; the proximal tubules then secrete the MAG3 into the tubular lumen. DTPA is the second most commonly used renal radiopharmaceutical in the United States, primarily because it is the least expensive. Tc-99m-DTPA is filtered by the glomerulus and may be used to measure the glomerular filtration rate (GFR). The extraction fraction of DTPA is approximately 20%, less than half that of MAG3. However, EC is preferred when the serum Creatinine is high. A MAG3 scan is a diagnostic imaging procedure that allows a nuclear medicine physician or a radiologist to visualize the kidneys and learn more about how they are functioning. MAG3 is an acronym for mercapto acetyl tri glycine, a compound that is chelated with a radioactive element - technetium-99m. NOTE: A MAG3 scan, along with a DTPA scan, are both types of renograms. This article only deals with MAG3 scans. After injection into the venous system, the compound is excreted by the kidneys and its progress through the renal system can be tracked with a gamma camera. If the kidney is not getting blood for example, it will not be viewed at all, even if it looks structurally normal in medical ultrasonography or magnetic resonance imaging. If the kidney is getting blood, but there is an obstruction inferior to the kidney in the bladder or ureters, the radioisotope will not pass beyond the level of the obstruction, whereas if there is a partial obstruction then there is a delayed transit time for the MAG3 to pass. More information can be gathered by calculating time activity curves; with normal kidney perfusion, peak activity should be observed after 35 minutes. The relative quantitative information gives the differential function between each kidney's filtration activity. The technique is very useful in evaluating the functioning of kidneys. It is widely used before renal transplantation to assess the vascularity of the kidney to be transplanted and with a test dose of captopril to highlight possible renal artery stenosis in the donor's other kidney, and later the performance of the transplant. The use of the test to identify reduced renal function after test doses of captopril (an angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor drug) has also been used to identify the cause of hypertension in patients with renal failure. Initially there was uncertainty as to the usefulness, or best test parameter to identify renal artery stenosis, the eventual consensus was that the distinctive finding is of alteration in the differential function. In 1986, it was developed at the University of Utah by Dr. Alan R. Fritzberg, Dr. Sudhakar Kasina, and Dr. Dennis Eshima. The drug underwent clinical trials in 1987 and passed Phase III testing in 1988. 99mTc-MAG3 has replaced the older iodine-131 orthoiodohippurate or I131-Hippuran because of better quality imaging regardless of the level of renal function, and with the benefit of being able to administer lower radiation dosages. 