Reduced Level in surveying refers to equating elevations of survey points with reference to a common assumed datum. It is a vertical distance between survey point and adopted datum plane. Thus it is considered as the base elevation which is used as reference to reckon heights or depths of other important places. Reduced here means equating and Level means Elevations. Datum may be real or imaginary location with a nominated elevation of straight zero. The most common and convenient datum which is internationally accepted is mean sea level. Countries take their nearby sea levels as datum planes for calculations of Reduced levels . For example Pakistan takes sea near Karachi as its datum while India takes sea near Mumbai as its datum for calculation of Reduced levels of different places in their respective countries. The term Reduced Level is denoted shortly by RL. National survey departments of each country determines RLs of significantly important locations or points. These points are called as permanent benchmarks and this survey process is known as Great Trigonometrical Surveying (GTS). The permanent bench marks act as reference points for determining RLs of other locations in a particular country. The instruments used to determine reduced level include:- Optical Levelling instruments like Automatic Level, Y-Level, Dumpy level and Cokes reversible level. Anyone of these can be used at a time for the purpose. Levelling Staff. Tripod stand RL of a survey point can be determined by two methods:- Height of Instrument method Rise and Fall method For drainage of water under gravity a suitable slope is required. Thus roads are built in the fashion that their RLs on sides are comparatively smaller than the RL at the mid-span of the road. This ensures proper drainage of water from roads. To construct a buildings, roads, dams a horizontal levelled surface is required. So at constructive sites RLs of different points are obtained. The ground surface is then being levelled to RL which is obtained by taking arthemetic mean of RLs of different points. 