The Regional policy of the European Union (EU), also referred as Cohesion Policy, is a policy with the stated aim of improving the economic well-being of regions in the EU and also to avoid regional disparities. More than one third of the EU's budget is devoted to this policy, which aims to remove economic, social and territorial disparities across the EU, restructure declining industrial areas and diversify rural areas which have declining agriculture. In doing so, EU regional policy is geared towards making regions more competitive, fostering economic growth and creating new jobs. The policy also has a role to play in wider challenges for the future, including climate change, energy supply and globalisation. The EU's regional policy covers all European regions, although regions across the EU fall in different categories (so-called objectives), depending mostly on their economic situation. In the current 20142020 funding period, money is allocated differently between regions that are deemed to be "more developed" (with GDP per capita over 90% of the EU average), "transition" (between 75% and 90%), and "less developed" (less than 75%), and additional funds are set aside for member states with GNI per capita under 90 percent of the EU average in the Cohesion Fund. Between 2007 and 2013, EU regional policy consisted of three objectives: Convergence, Regional competitiveness and employment, and European territorial cooperation; the previous three objectives (from 20002006) were simply known as Objectives 1, 2 and 3. By far the largest amount of regional policy funding is dedicated to the regions designated as less developed. This covers Europe's poorest regions whose per capita gross domestic product (GDP) is less than 75% of the EU average. This includes nearly all the regions of the new member states, most of Southern Italy, Greece and Portugal, and some parts of the United Kingdom and Spain. With the addition of the newest member countries in 2004 and 2007, the EU average GDP fell. As a result, some regions in the EU's "old" member states, which used to be eligible for funding under the Convergence objective, became above the 75% threshold. These regions received transitional, "phasing out" support during the previous funding period of 200713. Regions that used to be covered under the convergence criteria but got above the 75% threshold even within the EU-15 received "phasing-in" support through the Regional competitiveness and employment objective. Funding for less developed regions, like the Convergence objective before it, aims to allow the regions affected to catch up with the EU's more prosperous regions, thereby reducing economic disparity within the European Union. Examples of types of projects funded under this objective include improving basic infrastructure, helping businesses, building or modernising waste and water treatment facilities, and improving access to high-speed Internet connections. Regional policy projects in less developed regions are supported by three European funds: the European Regional Development Fund (ERDF), the European Social Fund (ESF) and the Cohesion Fund. = Bulgaria all Croatia - all Czech Republic all (except Prague) Estonia all France French Guiana, Guadeloupe, Martinique, Runion Greece Anatoliki Makedonia Thraki, Dytiki Ellada, Ipeiros, Kentriki Makedonia, Thessalia Hungary all (except Central Hungary) Italy Basilicata, Calabria, Campania, Apulia, Sicily Latvia all Lithuania all Poland all (except Masovian Voivodeship) Portugal Alentejo, Azores, Centro, Norte Romania all (except Bucharest) Slovakia all (except Bratislava) Slovenia Vzhodna Slovenija Spain Extremadura United Kingdom Cornwall and the Isles of Scilly, West Wales and the Valleys These are regions whose GDP per capita falls between 75 and 90 percent of the EU average. As such, they receive less funding than the less developed regions but more funding than the more developed regions. = Austria Burgenland Belgium all of Wallonia (except Walloon Brabant) Denmark Sjlland France Auvergne, Corsica, Franche-Comt, Languedoc-Roussillon, Limousin, Lorraine, Lower Normandy, Nord-Pas-de-Calais, Picardy, Poitou-Charentes Germany Lneburg, all of the former East Germany sans Berlin (except Leipzig) Greece Dytiki Makedonia, Ionia Nisia, Kriti, Peloponnisos, Sterea Ellada, Voreio Aigaio Italy Abruzzo, Molise, Sardinia Malta all Portugal Algarve Spain Andaluca, Canarias, Castilla-La Mancha, Melilla, Murcia United Kingdom Cumbria, Devon, East Yorkshire and Northern Lincolnshire, Highlands and Islands, Lancashire, Lincolnshire, Merseyside, Northern Ireland, Shropshire and Staffordshire, South Yorkshire, Tees Valley and Durham This covers all European regions that are not covered elsewhere, namely those which have a GDP per capita above 90 percent of the EU average. The main aim of funding for these regions is to create jobs by promoting competitiveness and making the regions concerned more attractive to businesses and investors. Possible projects include developing clean transport, supporting research centres, universities, small businesses and start-ups, providing training, and creating jobs. Funding is managed through either the ERDF or the ESF. = Austria all (except Burgenland) Belgium all of Flanders, Walloon Brabant Cyprus all Czech Republic Prague Denmark all (except Sjlland) Finland all France Aquitaine, Burgundy, Brittany, Centre, Champagne-Ardenne, le-de-France, Midi-Pyrnes, Pays de la Loire, Provence-Alpes-Cte d'Azur, Rhne-Alpes, Upper Normandy Germany Berlin, Leipzig, all of the former West Germany sans Berlin (except Lneburg) Greece Attiki, Notio Aigaio Hungary Kzp-Magyarorszg Ireland all Italy Emilia-Romagna, Friuli-Venezia Giulia, Lazio, Liguria, Lombardy, Marche, Piedmont, South Tyrol, Trentino, Tuscany, Umbria, Valle d'Aosta, Veneto Luxembourg all Netherlands all Poland Masovian Voivodeship Portugal Lisbon region, Madeira Romania Bucharest Slovakia Bratislava Slovenia - Zahodna Slovenija Spain Aragon, Asturias, Balearic Islands, Basque Country, Cantabria, Castilla y Len, Catalonia, Ceuta, Galicia, La Rioja, Madrid Region, Navarre, Valencian Community Sweden all United Kingdom all of London, South East England, and the East of England, plus Dorset, Somerset, Gloucestershire, Wiltshire, Herefordshire, Worcestershire, Warwickshire, West Midlands, Leicestershire, Rutland, Northamptonshire, Derbyshire, Nottinghamshire, Cheshire, Greater Manchester, West Yorkshire, North Yorkshire, Tyne and Wear, Northumberland, South Western Scotland, Eastern Scotland, North Eastern Scotland and East Wales This objective aims to reduce the importance of borders within Europe both between and within countries by improving regional cooperation. It allows for three different types of cooperation: cross-border, transnational and interregional cooperation. The objective is currently by far the least important in pure financial terms, accounting for only 2.5% of the EU's regional policy budget. It is funded exclusively through the ERDF. 