Rollball is a played between two teams of 12 players. Out of 12 only 6 players are allowed to play on court at a time. This game is played on skates. The ball can be held in single hand or both hands, even during passing. A player must dribble the ball while carrying it. This game can be played on Ice Skating rink as well. There are two referees in a match.This game was created by Raju Dabhade of Pune City, India while he was sports teacher at MES Bal Shikshan Mandir, English Medium School and is also Secretary of International Rollball Federation. jersey Knee protector. carpet. (only when played on ice) The court size can vary from 28m to 40m in length and 15m to 20m in width. The court consist of a center line. Penalty line is drawn 4.5m or 3.5m away from goal. Free Throw line or Goalkeeper's line or D arena is 3.5m to 2.5m away from goal. The playing court is marked by 5 cm boundary line. All other line are marked by red or white color. The court is hard and is made of Concrete, Tar, Mat or Wood. A 3-meter line is drawn as safety margin outside the boundary line. The first Rollball world cup was held at the Shree Shiv Chhatrapati Sports Complex in Pune in Maharashtra state of the Republic of India. This was held from 17 April 2011 to 22 April 2011. Denmark was runner-up. Host India was the winner. The following nations participated in 1st Rollball world cup:- Bangladesh. Belgium. Belarus. China. Denmark. Great Britain. Hong Kong. India. Kenya. Malaysia. Netherlands. Nepal. Sweden. Tanzania. United Arab Emirates. Uganda. The second World Cup was held in Nairobi, Kenya from 3 to 6 October 2013. The International Rollball Federation (IRBF) is body which is associated with International Rollball. The following nations are members of the International Rollball Federation (IRBF):- Bangladesh. China. Germany. Great Britain. Guyana. Hong Kong. India. Iran. Republic of Ireland. Kenya. Malaysia. Nepal. Pakistan. Romania. Singapore. United Arab Emirates. Uganda. United States. Uzbekistan. 