The Romance languagessometimes called the Latin languages, and occasionally the Romanic or Neo-Latin languagesare the modern languages that evolved from spoken Latin between the sixth and ninth centuries A.D. and that thus form a branch of the Italic languages within the Indo-European language family. Today, around 800 million people are native speakers worldwide, mainly in Europe and the Americas, but also elsewhere. Additionally, the major Romance languages have many non-native speakers and enjoy widespread use as lingua francas. This is especially the case for French, which is in widespread use throughout Central and West Africa, Madagascar, Mauritius and the Maghreb region. The five most widely spoken Romance languages by number of native speakers are Spanish (410 million), Portuguese (216 million), French (75 million), Italian (60 million), and Romanian (25 million). Because of the difficulty of imposing boundaries on a continuum, various counts of the Romance languages are given; Dalby lists 23 based on mutual intelligibility: Ibero-Romance: Portuguese and Galician, Mirandese and Asturian-Leonese, Spanish, Aragonese; Occitano-Romance: Catalan, Occitan; Gallo-Romance: Langues d'ol (including French), Franco-Provenal; Rhaeto-Romance: Romansh, Ladin, Friulian; Gallo-Italic languages; Venetian; Italo-Romance: Corsican, Italian, Neapolitan-Sicilian; Sardinian; Dalmatian (extinct); Romanian: Daco-Romanian, Istro-Romanian, Aromanian, and Megleno-Romanian. In several of these cases, more than one variety has been standardized, so is considered a distinct language in the popular conception; this is true, for example, with Asturian and Leonese, as well as Neapolitan and Sicilian. Romance languages are the continuation of Vulgar Latin, the popular and colloquial sociolect of Latin spoken by soldiers, settlers, and merchants of the Roman Empire, as distinguished from the classical form of the language spoken by the Roman upper classes, the form in which the language was generally written. Between 350 BC and AD 150, the expansion of the Empire, together with its administrative and educational policies, made Latin the dominant native language in continental Western Europe. Latin also exerted a strong influence in southeastern Britain, the Roman province of Africa, the Roman province of Asia and the Balkans north of the Jireek Line. During the Empire's decline, and after its fragmentation and collapse in the fifth century, varieties of Latin began to diverge within each local area at an accelerated rate and eventually evolved into a continuum of recognizably different typologies. The overseas empires established by Portugal, Spain, and France from the fifteenth century onward spread their languages to the other continents to such an extent that about two-thirds of all Romance language speakers today live outside Europe. Despite other influences (e.g. substratum from pre-Roman languages, especially Continental Celtic languages; and superstratum from later Germanic or Slavic invasions), the phonology, morphology, and lexicon of all Romance languages consist mainly of evolved forms of Vulgar Latin. However, some notable differences occur between today's Romance languages and their Roman ancestor. With only one or two exceptions, Romance languages have lost the declension system of Latin and, as a result, have SVO sentence structure and make extensive use of prepositions. The term "Romance" comes from the Vulgar Latin adverb romanice, derived from Romanicus: for instance, in the expression romanice loqui, "to speak in Roman" (that is, the Latin vernacular), contrasted with latine loqui, "to speak in Latin" (Medieval Latin, the conservative version of the language used in writing and formal contexts or as a lingua franca), and with barbarice loqui, "to speak in Barbarian" (the non-Latin languages of the peoples living outside the Roman Empire). From this adverb the noun romance originated, which applied initially to anything written romanice, or "in the Roman vernacular". The word 'romance' with the modern sense of romance novel or love affair has the same origin. In the medieval literature of Western Europe, serious writing was usually in Latin, while popular tales, often focusing on love, were composed in the vernacular and came to be called "romances". Lexical and grammatical similarities among the Romance languages, and between Latin and each of them, are apparent from the following examples having the same meaning in various Romance lects: English: She always closes the window before she dines Some of the divergence comes from semantic change: where the same root word has developed different meanings. For example, the Portuguese word fresta is descended from Latin fenestra "window" (and is thus cognate to French fentre, Italian finestra, Romanian fereastr and so on), but now means "skylight" and "slit". Cognates may exist but have become rare, such as finiestra in Spanish, or dropped out of use entirely. The Spanish and Portuguese terms defenestrar meaning "to throw through a window" and fenestrado meaning "replete with windows" also have the same root, but are later borrowings from Latin. Likewise, Portuguese also has the word cear, a cognate of Italian cenare and Spanish cenar, but uses it in the sense of "to have a late supper" in most varieties, while the preferred word for "to dine" is jantar (related to archaic Spanish yantar "to eat") because of semantic changes in the 19th century. Galician has both fiestra (from medieval festra, the ancestor of standard Portuguese fresta) and the less frequently used vent and xanela. As an alternative to lei (originally the genitive form), Italian has the pronoun ella, a cognate of the other words for "she", but it is hardly ever used in speaking. Spanish, Asturian, and Leonese ventana and Mirandese and Sardinian bentana come from Latin ventus "wind" (cf. English window, etymologically 'wind eye'), and Portuguese janela, Galician xanela, Mirandese jinela from Latin *ianuella "small opening", a derivative of ianua "door". Sardinian balcone (alternative for ventna/bentna) comes from Old Italian and is similar to other Romance languages such as French balcon (from Italian balcone), Portuguese balco, Romanian balcon, Spanish balcn, Catalan balc and Corsican balconi (alternative for purtellu). Documentary evidence is limited about Vulgar Latin for the purposes of comprehensive research, and the literature is often hard to interpret or generalize. Many of its speakers were soldiers, slaves, displaced peoples, and forced resettlers, more likely to be natives of conquered lands than natives of Rome. Vulgar Latin is believed to have already had most of the features shared by all Romance languages, which distinguish them from Classical Latin, such as the almost complete loss of the Latin case system and its replacement by prepositions; the loss of the neuter gender and comparative inflections; replacement of some verb paradigms by innovations (e.g. the synthetic future gave way to an originally analytic strategy now typically formed by infinitive + evolved present indicative forms of 'have'); the use of articles; and the initial stages of the palatalization of the plosives /k/, /g/, and /t/. To some scholars, this suggests the form of Vulgar Latin that evolved into the Romance languages was around during the time of the Roman Empire (from the end of the first century BC), and was spoken alongside the written Classical Latin which was reserved for official and formal occasions. Other scholars argue that the distinctions are more rightly viewed as indicative of sociolinguistic and register differences normally found within any language. During the political decline of the Western Roman Empire in the fifth century, there were large-scale migrations into the empire, and the Latin-speaking world was fragmented into several independent states. Central Europe and the Balkans were occupied by the Germanic and Slavic tribes, as well as by the Huns, which isolated the Vlachs from the rest of Latin Europe. British Romance and African Romance, the forms of Vulgar Latin used in southeastern Britain and the Roman province of Africa, where it had been spoken by much of the urban population, disappeared in the Middle Ages (as did Pannonian Romance in what is now Hungary). But the Germanic tribes that had penetrated Italy, Gaul, and Hispania eventually adopted Latin/Romance and the remnants of Roman culture alongside existing inhabitants of those regions, and so Latin remained the dominant language there. Over the course of the 4th8th centuries AD, Vulgar Latin, by this time highly dialectalized, broke up into discrete languages that were no longer mutually intelligible. Clear evidence of Latin change comes from the Reichenau Glosses, an 8th-century compilation of about 1,200 words from the 4th-century Latin Vulgate Bible (St. Jerome) that were no longer intelligible along with their 8th-century equivalents in proto-Franco-Provenal. The following are some examples with reflexes in several modern, closely related Romance languages for comparison: In all of the above examples, the words appearing in the fourth century Vulgate are the same words as would have been used in Classical Latin of c. 50 BC. It is likely that some of these words had already disappeared from casual speech; but if so, they must have been still widely understood, as there is no recorded evidence that the common people of the time had difficulty understanding the language. By the 8th century, the situation was very different. During the late 8th century, Charlemagne, holding that "Latin of his age was by classical standards intolerably corrupt", successfully imposed Classical Latin as an artificial written vernacular for Western Europe. Unfortunately, this meant that parishioners could no longer understand the sermons of their priests, forcing the Council of Tours in 813 to issue an edict that priests needed to translate their speeches into the rustica romana lingua, an explicit acknowledgement of the reality of the Romance languages as separate languages from Latin. By this time, and possibly as early as the 6th century according to Price (1984), the Romance lects had split apart enough to be able to speak of separate Gallo-Romance, Ibero-Romance, Italo-Romance and Eastern Romance languages. Some researchers have postulated that the major divergences in the spoken dialects began in the 5th century, as the formerly widespread and efficient communication networks of the Western Roman Empire rapidly broke down, leading to the total disappearance of the Western Roman Empire by the end of the century. Unfortunately, the critical period between the 5th10th centuries AD is poorly documented because little or no writing from the chaotic "Dark Ages" of the 5th8th centuries has survived, and writing after that time was in consciously classicized Medieval Latin, with vernacular writing only beginning in earnest in the 11th or 12th centuries. Between the 10th and 13th centuries, some local vernaculars developed a written form and began to supplant Latin in many of its roles. In some countries, such as Portugal, this transition was expedited by force of law; whereas in others, such as Italy, many prominent poets and writers used the vernacular of their own accord some of the most famous in Italy being Giacomo da Lentini and Dante Alighieri. The invention of the printing press brought a tendency towards greater uniformity of standard languages within political boundaries, at the expense of other Romance languages and dialects less favored politically. In France, for instance, the dialect spoken in the region of Paris gradually spread to the entire country, and the Occitan of the south lost ground. The Romance language most widely spoken natively today is Spanish (Castilian), followed by Portuguese, French, Italian, Romanian and Catalan, which together cover a vast territory in Europe and beyond, and work as official and national languages in dozens of countries. Galician, with more than a million native speakers, is official together with Spanish in Galicia, and has legal recognition in neighbouring territories in Castilla y Len. A few other languages have official recognition on a regional or otherwise limited level; for instance, Asturian and Aragonese in Spain; Mirandese in Portugal; Friulan, Sardinian and Franco-Provenal in Italy; and Romansh in Switzerland. French, Italian, Portuguese, Spanish, and Romanian are also official languages of the European Union. Spanish, Portuguese, French, Italian, Romanian, and Catalan are the official languages of the Latin Union; and French and Spanish are two of the six official languages of the United Nations. Outside of Europe, French, Portuguese and Spanish are spoken and enjoy official status in various countries that emerged from the respective colonial empires. French is one of the official languages of Canada, and it also has official status in many countries of Africa, as well as in some island nations in the Indian and Pacific Oceans. Spanish is an official language in nine countries of South America, home to about half that continent's population; in six countries of Central America (all except Belize); and in Mexico. In the Caribbean, it is official in Cuba, the Dominican Republic, and Puerto Rico. In Africa it is the official language of Equatorial Guinea. Portuguese, in its original homeland, Portugal, is spoken by virtually the entire population of 10 million. As the official language of Brazil, it is spoken by some 200 million people in that country, as well as by neighboring residents of eastern Paraguay and northern Uruguay, accounting for a little more than half the population of South America. It is the official language of six African countries (Angola, Cape Verde, Guinea-Bissau, Mozambique, Equatorial Guinea, and So Tom and Prncipe), and is spoken as a first language by perhaps 30 million residents of that continent. In Asia, Portuguese is co-official with other languages in East Timor and Macau, while most Portuguese-speakers in Asiasome 400,000are in Japan due to return immigration of Japanese Brazilians. In North America 1,000,000 people speak Portuguese as their home language. In Oceania, Portuguese is the second most spoken Romance language, after French, due mainly to the number of speakers in East Timor. Its closest relative, Galician, has official status in the autonomous community of Galicia in Spain, together with Spanish. Although Italy also had some colonial possessions before World War II, its language did not remain official after the end of the colonial domination. As a result, Italian outside of Italy and Switzerland is now spoken only as a minority language by immigrant communities in North and South America and Australia. In some former Italian colonies in Africanamely Libya, Eritrea and Somaliait is spoken by a few educated people in commerce and government. Romania did not establish a colonial empire, but beyond its native territory in Southeastern Europe, it also spread to other countries on the Mediterranean (especially the other Romance countries, most notably Italy and Spain), and elsewhere such as Israel, where it is the native language of five percent of the population, and is spoken by many more as a secondary language; this is due to the large numbers of Romanian-born Jews who moved to Israel after World War II. Some 2.6 million people in the former Soviet republic of Moldova speak a variety of Romanian, called variously Moldovan or Romanian by them. The total native speakers of Romance languages are divided as follows (with their ranking within the languages of the world in brackets): Spanish (Hispanosphere) 49% (2nd) Portuguese (Lusosphere) 26% (6th) French (Francophonie) 8.6% (approx. 18th) Italian 7.7% (approx. 23rd) Romanian 3.0% (approx. 50th) Catalan 0.9% (not in the top 100) Others 3.6% Catalan is unusual in that it is not the main language of any nation-state, other than Andorra (a microstate between Spain and France), but nonetheless has been able to compete and even gain speakers at the expense of the dominant language of its nation (Spanish); in fact, Catalan is the only minority European language whose long-term survival is probably not under threat. This is because unlike most minority-languages, Catalan has not remained linked to tradition and rural culture. Catalan was used for high-level culture in the Middle Age and early modern times, and again from the 21st century. Besides it, a rich and lively popular culture (songs, literature, theatre, newspapers) has always existed and evolved in accordance with times. The result is a Catalan national feeling surviving the kingdoms union, and the belief that the Catalan language is a critical component of the separate ethnic identity of the Catalan people. This has allowed them to resist the historic persecutions and high immigration rates as well as the assimilationist urges that are in the process of destroying most of the remaining minority-language communities, even those that have strong government support (e.g. Irish language speakers). The remaining Romance languages survive mostly as spoken languages for informal contact. National governments have historically viewed linguistic diversity as an economic, administrative or military liability, as well as a potential source of separatist movements; therefore, they have generally fought to eliminate it, by extensively promoting the use of the official language, restricting the use of the "other" languages in the media, characterizing them as mere "dialects", or even persecuting them. As a result, all of these languages are considered endangered to varying degrees according to the UNESCO Red Book of Endangered Languages, ranging from "vulnerable" (e.g. Sicilian and Venetian) to "severely endangered" (Arpitan, most of the Occitan varieties). Since the late twentieth and early twenty-first centuries, increased sensitivity to the rights of minorities has allowed some of these languages to start recovering their prestige and lost rights. Yet it is unclear whether these political changes will be enough to reverse the decline of minority Romance languages. The classification of the Romance languages is inherently difficult, because most of the linguistic area is a dialect continuum, and in some cases political biases can come into play. Along with Latin (which is not included among the Romance languages) and a few extinct languages of ancient Italy, they make up the Italic branch of the Indo-European family. There are various schemes used to subdivide the Romance languages. Three of the most common schemes are as follows: Italo-Western vs. Eastern vs. Southern. This is the scheme followed by Ethnologue, and is based primarily on the outcome of the ten monophthong vowels in Classical Latin. This is discussed more below. West vs. East. This scheme divides the various languages along the La SpeziaRimini Line, which runs across north-central Italy just to the north of the city of Florence (whose speech forms the basis of standard Italian). In this scheme, "East" includes the languages of central and southern Italy, and the Balkan Romance (or "Eastern Romance") languages in Romania, Greece, and elsewhere in the Balkans; "West" includes the languages of Portugal, Spain, France, northern Italy and Switzerland. Sardinian does not easily fit in this scheme. "Conservative" vs. "innovatory". This is a non-genetic division whose precise boundaries are subject to debate. Generally, the Gallo-Romance languages (discussed further below) form the core "innovatory" languages, with standard French generally considered the most innovatory of all, while the languages near the periphery (which include Spanish, Portuguese, Italian and Romanian) are "conservative". Sardinian is generally acknowledged the most conservative Romance language, and was also the first language to split off genetically from the rest, possibly as early as the first century BC. Dante famously denigrated the Sardinians for the conservativeness of their speech, remarking that they imitate Latin "like monkeys imitate men". The main subfamilies that have been proposed by Ethnologue within the various classification schemes for Romance languages are: Italo-Western, the largest group, which includes languages such as Catalan, Portuguese, Italian, Spanish, and French. Eastern Romance, which includes the Romance languages of Eastern Europe, such as Romanian. Southern Romance, which includes a few languages with particularly archaic features, such as Sardinian and, partially, Corsican. This family is thought to have included the now-vanished Romance languages of Africa (or at least, they appear to have evolved their vowels in the same way). The three-way division is made primarily based on the outcome of Vulgar Latin (Proto-Romance) vowels: Italo-Western is in turn split along the so-called La SpeziaRimini Line in northern Italy, which divides the central and southern Italian languages from the so-called Western Romance languages to the north and west. The primary characteristics dividing the two are: Lenition of intervocalic stops, which happens to the northwest but not to the southeast. Degemination of geminate stops (producing new intervocalic voiceless stops, after the old ones were lenited), which again happens to the northwest but not to the southeast. Deletion of intertonic vowels (between the stressed syllable and either the first or last syllable), again in the northwest but not the southeast. Use of plurals in /s/ in the northwest vs. plurals using vowel change in the southeast. Development of palatalized /k/ before /e,i/ to /(t)s/ in the northwest vs. /t/ in the southeast. Development of /kt/, which develops to /xt/ > /it/ (sometimes progressing further to /t/) in the northwest but /tt/ in the southeast. In fact, the reality is somewhat more complex. All of the "southeast" characteristics apply to all languages southeast of the line, and all of the "northwest" characteristics apply to all languages in France and (most of) Spain. However, the Gallo-Italic languages and the Rhaeto-Romance languages of Switzerland and Italy are somewhere in between. All of these languages do have the "northwest" characteristics of lenition and loss of gemination. However: The GalloItalic languages have vowel-changing plurals rather than /s/ plurals. The Lombard language in north-central Italy and the Rhaeto-Romance languages have the "southeast" characteristic of /t/ instead of /(t)s/ for palatalized /k/. The Venetian language in northeast Italy and some of the Rhaeto-Romance languages have the "southeast" characteristic of developing /kt/ to /tt/. On top of this, the ancient Mozarabic language in southern Spain, at the far end of the "northwest" group, had the "southeast" characteristics of lack of lenition and palatalization of /k/ to /t/. Certain languages around the Pyrenees (e.g. some highland Aragonese dialects) also lack lenition, and northern French dialects such as Norman and Picard have palatalization of /k/ to /t/ (although this is possibly an independent, secondary development, since /k/ between vowels, i.e. when subject to lenition, developed to /dz/ rather than /d/, as would be expected for a primary development). The usual solution to these issues is to create various nested subgroups. Western Romance is split into the Gallo-Iberian languages, in which lenition happens and which include nearly all the Western Romance languages, and the Pyrenean-Mozarabic group, which includes the remaining languages without lenition (and is unlikely to be a valid clade; probably at least two clades, one for Mozarabic and one for Pyrenean). Gallo-Iberian is split in turn into the Iberian languages (e.g. Spanish and Portuguese), and the larger Gallo-Romance languages (stretching from eastern Spain to northeast Italy). Probably a more accurate description, however, would be to say that there was a focal point of innovation located in central France, from which a series of innovations spread out as areal changes. The La SpeziaRimini Line represents the farthest point to the southeast that these innovations reached, corresponding to the northern chain of the Apennine Mountains, which cuts straight across northern Italy and forms a major geographic barrier to further language spread. This would explain why some of the "northwest" features (almost all of which can be characterized as innovations) end at differing points in northern Italy, and why some of the languages in geographically remote parts of Spain (in the south, and high in the Pyrenees) are lacking some of these features. It also explains why the languages in France (especially standard French) seem to have innovated earlier and more completely than other Western Romance languages. Many of the "southeast" features also apply to the Eastern Romance languages (particularly, Romanian), despite the geographic discontinuity. Examples are lack of lenition, maintenance of intertonic vowels, use of vowel-changing plurals, and palatalization of /k/ to /t/. (Gemination is missing, which may be an independent development, and /kt/ develops into /pt/ rather than either of the normal Italo-Western developments.) This has led some researchers to postulate a basic two-way East-West division, with the "Eastern" languages including Romanian and central and southern Italian. Sardinian does not fit into this picture at all. It is clear that Sardinian became linguistically independent from the remainder of the Romance languages at an extremely early date, possibly already by the first century BC. Sardinian contains a large number of archaic features, including total lack of palatalization of /k/ and /g/ and a large amount of vocabulary preserved nowhere else, including some items already archaic by the time of Classical Latin (first century BC). Sardinian has plurals in /s/ but no lenition of voiceless consonants (at least in most conservative Nuorese dialects) and a number of innovations unseen elsewhere: most famously, its unique vowel system, but also development of /au/ to /a/, a peculiar sort of lenition that operates as a synchronic feature, and use of su < ipsum as an article (another archaic feature, also seen in the Catalan of the Balearic Islands and formerly more widespread in Occitano-Romance, known as article salat the salat article, or literally the "salted" article). = The Gallo-Romance languages are generally considered the most innovative (least conservative) among the Romance languages. Northern Francethe medieval area of the langue d'ol, out of which modern French developedwas the epicenter. Characteristic Gallo-Romance features generally developed earliest and appear in their most extreme manifestation in the langue d'ol, gradually spreading out from there along riverways and transalpine roads. It is not coincidental that the earliest vernacular Romance writing occurred in Northern France: Generally, the development of vernacular writing in a given area was forced by the almost total inability of Romance speakers to understand the Classical Latin that still served as the vehicle of writing and culture. Gallo-Romance languages as a whole are usually characterized by the loss of all unstressed final vowels other than /-a/ (most significantly, final /-o/ and /-e/ were lost). However, when the loss of a final vowel would result in an impossible final cluster (e.g. /tr/), a prop vowel appears in place of the lost vowel, usually /e/. Generally, the same changes also occurred in final syllables closed by a consonant. Furthermore, loss of /e/ in a final syllable was early enough in Primitive Old French that the Classical Latin third-singular /t/ was often preserved, e.g. venit "he comes" > /vnet/ (Romance vowel changes) > /vjnet/ (diphthongization) > /vjned/ (lenition) > /vjnd/ (Gallo-Romance final vowel loss) > /vjnt/ (final devoicing). Elsewhere, final vowel loss occurred later or unprotected /t/ was lost earlier (perhaps under Italian influence). Gallo-Romance can be divided into five subgroups: The Langues d'ol, most notably French, and several languages like Walloon, Picard, Normand, Poitevin, Bourgignon, etc. These are the most phonologically innovative Romance varieties. The Franco-Provenal language of southeastern France, western Switzerland, and Aosta Valley region of northwestern Italy. The Occitano-Romance languages of southern France and eastern Spain, namely Catalan, Occitan and Gascon. The inclusion of Catalan in Gallo-romance is disputed by some linguists who prefer to group it with Iberian Romance: This is because although Old Catalan is close to Old Occitan, it later adjusted its lexicon to some degree to align with Spanish; in general however, modern Catalan, especially grammatically, remains closest to modern Occitan than to either Spanish or Portuguese. The Gallo-Italian languages of northern Italy, including Piedmontese, Ligurian, Western Lombard, Eastern Lombard, Emilian and Romagnol. Ligurian and Eastern Lombard retain the final -o, being the exception in Gallo-Romance. The Rhaeto-Romance languages, including Romansh, and Friulian, and Ladin dialects. This is a diverse group, with the Italian varieties influenced by Venetan and Italian and Romansh by Franco-Provenal. Other than southern Occitano-Romance, the Gallo-Romance languages are quite innovatory, with French and some of the Gallo-Italian languages rivaling each other for the most extreme phonological changes compared with conservative languages. For example, French sain, saint, sein, ceint, ceint meaning "healthy, holy, breast, (he) girds, (was) girded" (Latin snum, sanctum, sinum, cinget, cinctum) are all pronounced /s/; similarly cent, sent, sans, sang meaning "hundred, (he) feels, without, blood" (Latin centum, sentit, (ab)sentis, sanguen) are all pronounced /s/. In some ways, however, the Gallo-Romance languages are conservative. The older stages of many of the languages are famous for preserving a two-case system consisting of nominative and oblique, fully marked on nouns, adjectives and determiners, inherited almost directly from the Latin nominative and accusative cases and preserving a number of different declensional classes and irregular forms. In the opposite of the normal pattern, the languages closest to the ol epicenter preserve the case system the best, while languages at the peripherynear to languages that had long before lost the case system except on pronounslose it early. For example, the case system is well preserved in Old Occitan up through the thirteenth century or so but is totally lost in Old Catalan at the time, despite otherwise being virtually the same language at the time. The Occitan group is known for an innovatory // ending on many subjunctive and preterite verbs, and an unusual development of [] (Latin intervocalic -d-), which in many varieties merges with [dz] (from intervocalic palatalized -c- and -ty-). The following tables show two examples of the extensive phonological changes that French has undergone. (Compare modern Italian saputo, vita, even more conservative than the reconstructed Western Romance forms.) Notable characteristics of the Gallo-Romance languages are: Early loss of all final vowels other than /a/the defining characteristic, as noted above. Further reductions of final vowels in Langue d'ol and many Gallo-Italic languages, with the feminine /a/ and prop vowel /e/ merging into //, which is often subsequently dropped. Early, heavy reduction of unstressed vowels in the interior of a word (another defining characteristic). This, along with final vowel reduction, accounts for the lion's share of the extreme phonemic differences between the Northern and Central Italian dialects, which otherwise share a great deal of vocabulary and syntax. Loss of final vowels phonemicized the long vowels that formerly were automatic concomitants of stressed open syllables. These phonemic long vowels are maintained directly in many Northern Italian dialects. Elsewhere, phonemic length was lost, but in the meantime many of the long vowels diphthongized, resulting in a maintenance of the original distinction. The langue d'ol branch is again at the forefront of innovation, with no less than five of the seven long vowels diphthongizing (only high vowels were spared). Front rounded vowels are present in all four branches. /u/ usually fronts to /y/, and secondary mid front rounded vowels often develop from long /o/ or //. Extreme lenition (i.e. multiple rounds of lenition) occurs in many languages esp. in Langue d'ol and many Gallo-Italian languages. Examples from French: vtam > vie /vi/ "life"; *saptum > su /sy/ "known"; similarly vu /vy/ "seen" < *vidtum, pu /py/ "been able" < *pottum, eu /y/ "had" < *habtum. The Langue d'ol, Swiss Rhaeto-Romance languages and many of the northern dialects of Occitan have a secondary palatalization of /k/ and // before /a/, producing different results from the primary Romance palatalization: e.g. centum "hundred" > cent /s/, cantum "song" > chant //. Other than the Occitano-Romance languages, most Gallo-Romance languages are subject-obligatory (whereas all the rest of the Romance languages are pro-drop languages). This is a late development triggered by progressive phonetic erosion: Old French was still a null-subject language, and this only changed upon loss of secondarily final consonants in Middle French. The Gallo-Italian and Italian Rhaeto-Romance languages have a number of features in common with the other Italian languages: Loss of final /s/, which triggers raising of the preceding vowel (more properly, the /s/ "debuccalizes" to /j/, which is monophthongized into a higher vowel), e.g. /-as/ > /-e/, /-es/ > /-i/, hence Standard Italian plural cani < canes, subjunctive tu canti < tu cantes, indicative tu cante < tu cantas (now tu canti in Standard Italian, borrowed from the subjunctive); amiche "female friends" < amicas. Use of nominative -i for masculine plurals instead of accusative -os. Some Romance languages have developed varieties which seem dramatically restructured as to their grammars or to be mixtures with other languages. It is not always clear whether they should be classified as Romance, pidgins, creole languages, or mixed languages. Some other languages, such as English, are sometimes thought of as creoles of semi-Romance ancestry. There are several dozens of creoles of French, Spanish, and Portuguese origin, some of them spoken as national languages in former European colonies. Creoles of French: Antillean (French Antilles) Haitian (one of Haiti's two official languages) Louisiana (USA) Mauritian (lingua franca of Mauritius) Runion (native language of Runion) Seychellois (Seychelles' official language) Creoles of Spanish: Chavacano (in part of Philippines) Palenquero (in part of Colombia) Creoles of Portuguese: Cape Verdean (Cape Verde's national language; includes several distinct languages) Upper Guinea (Guinea-Bissau's national language) Angolar (regional language in So Tom and Prncipe) Forro (regional language in So Tom and Prncipe) Papiamento (Dutch Antilles official language) Macanese (Macau) Kristang (Malaysia) Latin and the Romance languages have also served as the inspiration and basis of numerous auxiliary and constructed languages, so-called "neo-romantic languages". The concept was first developed in 1903 by Italian mathematician Giuseppe Peano, under the title Latino sine flexione. He wanted to create a naturalistic international language, as opposed to an autonomous constructed language like Esperanto or Volapuk which were designed for maximal simplicity of lexicon and derivation of words. Peano used Latin as the base of his language, because at the time of his flourishing it was the de facto international language of scientific communication. Other languages developed since include Idiom Neutral, Occidental, Lingua Franca Nova, and most famously and successfully, Interlingua. Each of these languages has attempted to varying degrees to achieve a pseudo-Latin vocabulary as common as possible to living Romance languages. There are also languages created for artistic purposes only, such as Talossan. Because Latin is a very well attested ancient language, some amateur linguists have even constructed Romance languages that mirror real languages that developed from other ancestral languages. These include Brithenig (which mirrors Welsh), Breathanach (mirrors Irish), Wenedyk (mirrors Polish), rjtrunn (mirrors Icelandic), and Helvetian (mirrors German). Romance languages have a number of shared features across all languages: Romance languages are moderately inflecting, i.e. there is a moderately complex system of affixes (primarily suffixes) that are attached to words to convey grammatical information such as number, gender, person, tense, etc. Verbs have much more inflection than nouns. The amount of synthesis is significantly more than English, but less than Classical Latin and much less than the oldest Indo-European languages (e.g. Ancient Greek, Sanskrit). Inflection is fusional, with a single affix representing multiple features (as contrasted with agglutinative languages such as Turkish or Japanese). For example, Portuguese amei "I loved" is composed of am- "love" and the fusional suffix -ei "first person, singular, preterite tense, indicative". Romance languages have a fairly strict subjectverbobject word order, with predominant use of head-first (right-branching) constructions. Adjectives, genitives and relative clauses all follow their head noun, although (except in Romanian) determiners usually precede. In general, nouns, adjectives and determiners inflect only according to grammatical gender (masculine or feminine) and grammatical number (singular or plural). Grammatical case is marked only on pronouns, as in English; case marking, as in English, is of the nominativeaccusative type (rather than e.g. the ergativeabsolutive marking of Basque or the split ergativity of Hindi). A significant exception, however, is Romanian, with two-case marking (nominative/accusative vs. genitive/dative) on nominal elements. Verbs are inflected according to a complex morphology that marks person, number (singular or plural), tense, mood (indicative, subjunctive, imperative), and sometimes aspect or gender. Grammatical voice (active, passive, middle/reflexive) and some grammatical aspects (in particular, the perfect aspect) are expressed using periphrastic constructions, as in the Italian present perfect (passato prossimo) io ho amato/io sono stato amato "I have loved/I have been loved". Most Romance languages are null subject languages (but modern French is not, as a result of the phonetic decay of verb endings). All Romance languages have two articles (definite and indefinite), and many have in addition a partitive article (expressing the concept of "some"). In some languages (notably, French), the use of an article with a noun is nearly obligatory; it serves to express grammatical number (no longer marked on most nouns) and to cope with the extreme homophony of French vocabulary as a result of extensive sound reductions. The phonology of most Romance languages is of moderate size with few unusual phonemes. Phonemic vowel length is uncommon. Some languages have developed nasal vowels or front rounded vowels. Word accent is of the stress (dynamic) type, rather than making use of pitch (as in Ancient Greek and some modern Slavic languages), and is free, occurring more or less unpredictably on one of the last three syllables. In practice, the stress is largely predictable, due to the many morphological and phonological stress-related patterns. Loss of the case system The most significant changes between Classical Latin and Proto-Romance (and hence all the modern Romance languages) relate to the reduction or loss of the Latin case system, and the corresponding syntactic changes that were triggered. The case system was drastically reduced from the vigorous six-case system of Latin. Although four cases can be constructed for Proto-Romance nouns (nominative, accusative, combined genitive/dative, and vocative), the vocative is marginal and present only in Romanian (where it may be an outright innovation), and of the remaining cases, no more than two are present in any one language. Romanian is the only modern Romance language with case marking on nouns, with a two-way opposition between nominative/accusative and genitive/dative. Some of the older Gallo-Romance languages (in particular, Old French, Old Occitan, Old Sursilvan and Old Friulian, and in traces Old Catalan and Old Venetan) had an opposition between nominative and general oblique, and in Ibero-Romance languages, such as Spanish and Portuguese, as well as in Italian (see under Case), a couple of examples are found which preserve the old nominative. As in English, case is preserved better on pronouns. Concomitant with the loss of cases, freedom of word order was greatly reduced. Classical Latin had a generally verb-final (SOV) but overall quite free word order, with a significant amount of word scrambling and mixing of left-branching and right-branching constructions. The Romance languages eliminated word scrambling and nearly all left-branching constructions, with most languages developing a rigid SVO, right-branching syntax. (Old French, however, had a freer word order due to the two-case system still present, as well as a predominantly verb-second word order developed under the influence of the Germanic languages.) Some freedom, however, is allowed in the placement of adjectives relative to their head noun. In addition, some languages (e.g. Spanish, Romanian) have an "accusative preposition" (Romanian pe, Spanish "personal a") along with clitic doubling, which allows for some freedom in ordering the arguments of a verb. The Romance languages developed grammatical articles where Latin had none. Articles are often introduced around the time a robust case system falls apart in order to disambiguate the remaining case markers (which are usually too ambiguous by themselves) and to serve as parsing clues that signal the presence of a noun (a function formerly served by the case endings themselves). This was the pattern followed by the Romance languages: In the Romance languages that still preserved a functioning nominal case system (e.g. Romanian and Old French), only the combination of article and case ending serves to uniquely identify number and case (compare the similar situation in modern German). All Romance languages have a definite article (originally developed from ipse "self" but replaced in nearly all languages by ille "that (over there)") and an indefinite article (developed from nus "one"). Many also have a partitive article (d "of" + definite article). Latin had a large number of syntactic constructions expressed through infinitives, participles, and similar nominal constructs. Examples are the ablative absolute, the accusative-plus-infinitive construction used for reported speech, gerundive constructions, and the common use of reduced relative clauses expressed through participles. All of these are replaced in the Romance languages by subordinate clauses expressed with finite verbs, making the Romance languages much more "verbal" and less "nominal" than Latin. Under the influence of the Balkan sprachbund, Romanian has progressed the furthest, largely eliminating the infinitive. (It is currently being revived, however, due to the increasing influence of other Romance languages.) Other changes Loss of phonemic vowel length, and change into a free-stressed language. Classical Latin had an automatically determined stress on the second or third syllable from the end, conditioned by vowel length; once vowel length was neutralized, stress was no longer predictable so long as it remained where it was (which it mostly did). Development of a series of palatal consonants as a result of palatalization. Loss of most traces of the neuter gender. Development of a series of analytic perfect tenses, comparable to English "I have done, I had done, I will have done". Loss of the Latin synthetic passive voice, replaced by an analytic construction comparable to English "it is/was done". Loss of deponent verbs, replaced by active-voice verbs. Replacement of the Latin future tense with a new tense formed (usually) by a periphrasis of infinitive + present tense of habre "have", which usually contracts into a new synthetic tense. A corresponding conditional tense is formed in the same way but using one of the past-tense forms of habre. Numerous lexical changes. A number of words were borrowed from the Germanic languages and Celtic languages. Many basic nouns and verbs, especially those that were short or had irregular morphology, were replaced by longer derived forms with regular morphology. Throughout the medieval period, words were borrowed from Classical Latin in their original form (learned words) or in something approaching the original form (semi-learned words), often replacing the popular forms of the same words. = Every language has a different set of vowels from every other. Common characteristics are as follows: Most languages have at least five monophthongs /a e i o u/. The parent language of most of the Italo-Western Romance languages (which includes the vast majority) actually had a seven-vowel system /a e i o u/, which is kept in most Italo-Western languages. In some languages, like Spanish and Romanian, the phonemic status and difference between open-mid and close-mid vowels was lost. French has probably the largest inventory of monophthongs, with conservative varieties having 12 oral vowels /a e i o u y / and 4 nasal vowels / /. European Portuguese also has a large inventory, with 9 oral monophthongs /a e i o u /, 5 nasal monophthongs / /, and a large number of oral and nasal diphthongs (see below). (The phonemic status of / / is somewhat doubtful, however, and neither phoneme exists in Brazilian Portuguese). Some languages have a large inventory of falling diphthongs. These may or may not be considered as phonemic units (rather than sequences of vowel+glide), depending on their behavior. As an example, French, Spanish and Italian have occasional instances of putative falling diphthongs formed from a vowel plus a non-syllabic /i/ or /u/ (e.g. Spanish veinte [bejnte] "twenty", deuda [dewa] "debt"; French paille [pj] "straw", caoutchouc [kautu] "rubber"; Italian lui [luj] "he", potei [potei] "I could"), but these are normally analyzed as sequences of vowel and glide. The diphthongs in Romanian, Portuguese, Catalan and Occitan, however, have various properties suggesting that they are better analyzed as unit phonemes. Portuguese, for example, has the diphthongs /aj j j ej j oj uj aw w ew iw (ow)/, where /ow/ (and to a lesser extent /ej/) appear only in some dialects. All except /aw w/ appear frequently in verb or noun inflections. (Portuguese also has nasal diphthongs; see below.) Among the major Romance languages, Portuguese and French have nasal vowel phonemes, stemming from nasalization before a nasal consonant followed by loss of the consonant (this occurred especially when the nasal consonant was not directly followed by a vowel). Originally, vowels in both languages were nasalized before all nasal consonants, but have subsequently become denasalized before nasal consonants that still remain (except in Brazilian Portuguese, where the pre-nasal vowels in words such as cama "bed", menos "less" remain highly nasalized). In Portuguese, nasal vowels are sometimes analyzed as phonemic sequences of oral vowels plus an underlying nasal consonant, but such an analysis is difficult in French because of the existence of minimal pairs such as bon /b/ "good (masc. )", bonne /bn/ "good (fem.)". In both languages, there are fewer nasal than oral vowels. Nasalization triggered vowel lowering in French, producing the 4 nasal vowels / / (although most speakers nowadays pronounce // as //). Vowel raising was triggered in Portuguese, however, producing the 5 nasal vowels / /. Vowel contraction and other changes also resulted in the Portuguese nasal diphthongs /w w j j j j/ (of which /j/ occurs in only two words, muito /mjtu/ "much, many, very", and mui /mj/ "very", and /j w/ are actually final-syllable allophones of / /). Most languages have fewer vowels in unstressed syllables than stressed syllables. This again reflects the Italo-Western Romance parent language, which had a seven-vowel system in stressed syllables (as described above) but only /a e i o u/ (with no low-mid vowels) in unstressed syllables. Some languages have seen further reductions: e.g. Standard Catalan has only [ i u] in unstressed syllables. In French, on the other hand, any vowel may take prosodic stress. Most languages have even fewer vowels in word-final unstressed syllables than elsewhere. For example, Old Italian allowed only /a e i o/, while the early stages of most Western Romance languages allowed only /a e o/. The Gallo-Romance languages went even farther, deleting all final vowels except /a/. Of these languages, French has carried things to the extreme by deleting all vowels after the accented syllable and uniformly accenting the final syllable (except for a more-or-less non-phonemic final unstressed [] that occasionally appears). Modern Spanish now allows final unstressed /i u/, and modern Italian allows final unstressed /u/, but they tend to occur largely in borrowed or onomatopoeic words, e.g. guru "guru", taxi "taxi", Spanish tribu "tribe" and espritu "spirit" (loanwords from Classical Latin), Italian babau "bogeyman" (onomatopoeic, cf. English "boo!"). The apparent Spanish exception casi "almost" originates from Latin quasi "as if" < quam s, and was probably influenced by si "if". Phonemic vowel length is uncommon. Vulgar Latin lost the phonemic vowel length of Classical Latin and replaced it with a non-phonemic length system where stressed vowels in open syllables were long, and all other vowels were short. Standard Italian still maintains this system, and it was rephonemicized in the Gallo-Romance languages (including the Rhaeto-Romance languages) as a result of the deletion of many final vowels. Some northern Italian languages (e.g. Friulan) still maintain this secondary phonemic length, but in most languages the new long vowels were either diphthongized or shortened again, in the process eliminating phonemic length. French is again the odd man out: Although it followed a normal Gallo-Romance path by diphthongizing five of the seven long vowels and shortening the remaining two, it phonemicized a third vowel length system around 1300 AD in syllables formerly closed with an /s/ (still marked with a circumflex accent), and now is in the process of phonemicizing a fourth system as a result of lengthening before final voiced fricatives. = Most Romance languages have similar sets of consonants. The following is a combined table of the consonants of the five major Romance languages (French, Spanish, Italian, Portuguese, Romanian). Key: bold: Appears in all 5 languages. italic: Appears in 34 languages. (parentheses): Appears in 2 languages. ((double parentheses)): Appears in only 1 language. Notable changes: Spanish has no phonemic voiced fricatives (however, [ ] occur as allophones of /b d / after a vowel and after certain consonants). The equivalent of /v/ merged with /b/, and all the rest became voiceless. It also lost //, which became /x/ or /h/ in some other dialects. The western languages (French, Spanish, Portuguese) all used to have the affricates /ts/, /dz/, /t/, /d/. By the fourteenth century or so, these all turned into fricatives except for Spanish and dialectal Portuguese /t/. (Spanish /ts/ ended up becoming //, at least in Northern and Central Spain; elsewhere, it merged with /s/, as in the other languages.) Romanian /dz/ likewise became /z/. French, and recently most varieties of Spanish, have lost // (which merged with /j/). Romanian merged both // and // into /j/. Most instances of most of the sounds below that occur (or used to occur, as described above) in all of the languages are cognate. However: Although all of the languages have or used to have /t/, almost none of these sounds are cognate between pairs of languages. The only real exception is many /t/ between Italian and Romanian, stemming from Latin C- before E or I. Italian also has /t/ from Vulgar Latin -CY-, and from -TY- following a consonant (elsewhere /ts/). Former French /t/ is from Latin C- before A, either word-initial or following a consonant; Spanish /t/ is from Latin -CT-, or from PL, CL following a consonant; former Portuguese /t/ is from Latin PL, CL, FL, either word-initial or following a consonant. Italian and former Romanian /dz/ (from some instances of Vulgar Latin -DY-) are not cognate with former western /dz/ (from lenition of /ts/). = Word stress was rigorously predictable in classical Latin except in a very few exceptional cases, either on the penultimate syllable (second from last) or antepenultimate syllable (third from last), according to the syllable weight of the penultimate syllable. Stress in the Romance Languages mostly remains on the same syllable as in Latin, but various sound changes have made it no longer so predictable. Minimal pairs distinguished only by stress exist in some languages, e.g. Italian Papa [pa.pa] "Pope" vs. pap [pa.pa] "daddy", or Spanish lmite [li.mi.te] "[a] limit", present subjunctive limite [li.mi.te] "[that] [I/he] limit" and preterite limit [li.mi.te] "[I] limited". Erosion of unstressed syllables following the stress has caused most Spanish and Portuguese words to have either penultimate or ultimate stress: e.g. Latin trdecim "thirteen" > Spanish trece, Portuguese treze; Latin amre "to love" > Spanish/Portuguese amar. Most words with antepenultimate stress are learned borrowings from Latin, e.g. Spanish/Portuguese fbrica "factory" (the corresponding inherited word is Spanish fragua, Portuguese frgua "forge"). This process has gone even farther in French, with deletion of all post-stressed vowels, leading to consistent, predictable stress on the last syllable: e.g. Latin Stephanum "Stephen" > Old French Estievne > French tienne /e.tjn/; Latin juvenis "young" > Old French juevne > French jeune /n/. This applies even to borrowings: e.g. Latin fabrica > French borrowing fabrique /fa.bik/ (the inherited word in this case being monosyllabic forge < Pre-French *fauriga). Other than French (with consistent final stress), the position of the stressed syllable generally falls on one of the last three syllables. Exceptions may be caused by clitics or (in Italian) certain verb endings, e.g. Italian telefonano [tel.fo.na.no] "they telephone"; Spanish entregndomelo [en.te.an.do.me.lo] "delivering it to me"; Italian mettiamocene [metja.mo.te.ne] "let's put some of it in there"; Portuguese dvamo-vo-lo [da.v.mu.vu.lu] "we were giving it to you". Stress on verbs is almost completely predictable in Spanish and Portuguese, but less so in Italian. Nouns, adjectives, and pronouns can be marked for gender, number and case. Adjectives and pronouns must agree in all features with the noun they are bound to. = The Romance languages inherited from Latin two grammatical numbers, singular and plural; there is no trace of a dual number. = Most Romance languages have two grammatical genders, masculine and feminine. The gender of animate nouns is generally natural (i.e. nouns referring to men are generally masculine, and vice versa), but for nonanimate nouns it is arbitrary. Although Latin had a third gender (neuter), there is little trace of this in most languages. The biggest exception is Romanian, where there is a productive class of "neuter" nouns, which include the descendants of many Latin neuter nouns and which behave like masculines in the singular and feminines in the plural, both in the endings used and in the agreement of adjectives and pronouns (e.g. un deget "one finger" vs. dou degete "two fingers", cf. Latin digitus, pl. digiti). Such nouns arose because of the identity of the Latin neuter singular -um with the masculine singular, and the identity of the Latin neuter plural -a with the feminine singular. A similar class exists in Italian, although it is no longer productive (e.g. il dito "the finger" vs. le dita "the fingers", l'uovo "the egg" vs. le uova "the eggs"). (A few isolated nouns in Latin had different genders in the singular and plural, but this was an unrelated phenomenon; this is similarly the case with a few French nouns, such as amour, dlice, orgue.) Spanish also has vestiges of the neuter in two demonstrative adjectives: eso, aquello (both meaning "that [one]"), the pronoun ello (meaning "it") and the article lo (used to intensify adjectives). Portuguese also has neuter demonstrative adjectives: "isto", "isso", "aquilo" (meaning "this [near me]", "this/that [near you]", "that [far from the both of us]"). = Latin had an extensive case system, where all nouns were declined in six cases (nominative, vocative, accusative, dative, genitive, and ablative) and two numbers. Adjectives were additionally declined in three genders, leading to potentially 6 2 3 = 36 endings per adjective. In practice, some category combinations had identical endings to other combinations, but a basic adjective like bonus "good" still had 14 distinct endings. In all Romance languages, this system was drastically reduced. In most modern Romance languages, in fact, case is no longer marked at all on nouns, adjectives and determiners, and most forms are derived from the Latin accusative case. Much like English, however, case has survived somewhat better on pronouns. Most pronouns have distinct nominative, accusative, genitive and possessive forms (cf. English "I, me, mine, my"). Many also have a separate dative form, a disjunctive form used after prepositions, and (in some languages) a special form used with the preposition con "with" (a conservative feature inherited from Latin forms such as mcum, tcum, nobiscum). The system of inflectional classes is also drastically reduced. The basic system is most clearly indicated in Spanish, where there are only three classes, corresponding to the first, second and third declensions in Latin: plural in -as (feminine), plural in -os (masculine), plural in -es (either masculine or feminine). The singular endings exactly track the plural, except the singular -e is dropped after certain consonants. The same system underlines many other modern Romance languages, such as Portuguese, French and Catalan. In these languages, however, further sound changes have resulted in various irregularities. In Portuguese, for example, loss of /l/ and /n/ between vowels (with nasalization in the latter case) produces various irregular plurals (nao naes "nation(s)"; hotel hotis "hotel(s)"). In French and Catalan, loss of /o/ and /e/ in most unstressed final syllables has caused the -os and -es classes to merge. In French, merger of remaining /e/ with final /a/ into [], and its subsequent loss, has completely obscured the original Romance system, and loss of final /s/ has caused most nouns to have identical pronunciation in singular and plural, although they are still marked differently in spelling (e.g. femme femmes "woman women", both pronounced /fam/). Noun inflection has survived in Romanian somewhat better than elsewhere. Determiners are still marked for two cases (nominative/accusative and genitive/dative) in both singular and plural, and feminine singular nouns have separate endings for the two cases. In addition, there is a separate vocative case, enriched with native development and Slavic borrowings (see some examples here) and the combination of noun with a following clitic definite article produces a separate set of "definite" inflections for nouns. The inflectional classes of Latin have also survived more in Romanian than elsewhere, e.g. om oameni "man men" (Latin homo homines); corp corpuri "body bodies" (Latin corpus corpora). (Many other exceptional forms, however, are due to later sound changes or analogy, e.g. cas case "house(s)" vs. lun luni "moon(s)"; frate frai "brother(s)" vs. carte cri "book(s)" vs. vale vi "valley(s)".) In Italian, the situation is somewhere in between Spanish and Romanian. There are no case endings and relatively few classes, as in Spanish, but noun endings are generally formed with vowels instead of /s/, as in Romanian: amico amici "friend(s) (masc. )", amica amiche "friend(s) (fem. )"; cane cani "dog(s)". The masculine plural amici is thought to reflect the Latin nominative plural - rather than accusative plural -s (Spanish -os); however, the other plurals are thought to stem from special developments of Latin -s and -s. A different type of noun inflection survived into the medieval period in a number of western Romance languages (Old French, Old Occitan, and the older forms of a number of Rhaeto-Romance languages). This inflection distinguished nominative from oblique, grouping the accusative case with the oblique, rather than with the nominative as in Romanian. The oblique case in these languages generally inherits from the Latin accusative; as a result, masculine nouns have distinct endings in the two cases while most feminine nouns do not. A number of different inflectional classes are still represented at this stage. For example, the difference in the nominative case between masculine li voisins "the neighbor" and li pere "the father", and feminine la riens "the thing" vs. la fame "the woman", faithfully reflects the corresponding Latin inflectional differences (vicnus vs. pater, fmina vs. rs). A number of synchronically quite irregular differences between nominative and oblique reflect direct inheritances of Latin third-declension nouns with two different stems (one for the nominative singular, one for all other forms), most with of which had a stress shift between nominative and the other forms: li ber le baron "baron" (bar barnem); la suer la seror "sister" (soror sorrem); li prestre le prevoire "priest" (presbyter presbyterem); li sire le seigneur "lord" (senior senirem); li enfes l'enfant "child" (infns infantem). A few of these multi-stem nouns derive from Latin forms without stress shift, e.g. li om le ome "man" (hom hominem). All of these multi-stem nouns refer to people; other nouns with stress shift in Latin (e.g. amor amrem "love") have not survived. Interestingly, some of the same nouns with multiple stems in Old French or Old Occitan have come down in Italian in the nominative rather than the accusative (e.g. uomo "man" < hom, moglie "wife" < mulier), suggesting that a similar system existed in pre-literary Italian. The modern situation in Sursilvan (one of the Rhaeto-Romance languages) is unique in that the original nominative/oblique distinction has been reinterpreted as a predicative/attributive distinction: il hotel ej viws natsionalizaws "the hotel has been nationalized" il hotel natsionalizaw "the nationalized hotel" As described above, case marking on pronouns is much more extensive than for nouns. Determiners (e.g. words such as "a", "the", "this") are also marked for case in Romanian. Most Romance languages have the following sets of pronouns and determiners: Personal pronouns, in three persons and two genders. A reflexive pronoun, used when the object is the same as the subject. This approximately corresponds to English "-self", but separate forms exist only in the third person, with no number marking. Definite and indefinite articles, and in some languages, a partitive article that expresses the concept of "some". A two-way or three-way distinction among demonstratives. Many languages have a three-way distinction of distance (near me, near you, near him) not paralleled in current English, but formerly present as "this/that/yon". Relative pronouns and interrogatives, with the same forms used for both (similar to English "who" and "which"). Various indefinite pronouns and determiners (e.g. Spanish algn "some", alguien "someone", algo "something"; ningn "no", nadie "no one"; todo "every"; cada "each"; mucho "much/many/a lot", poco "few/little"; otro "other/another"; etc.). = Unlike in English, a separate neuter personal pronoun ("it") generally does not exist, but both singular and plural third person distinguish masculine from feminine. Also, as described above, case is marked on pronouns even though it is not usually on nouns, similar to English. As in English, there are forms for nominative case (subject pronouns), oblique case (object pronouns), and genitive case (possessive pronouns); in addition, third-person pronouns distinguish accusative and dative. There is also an additional set of possessive determiners, distinct from the genitive case of the personal pronoun; this corresponds to the English difference between "my, your" and "mine, yours". Development from LatinEdit The Romance languages do not retain the Latin third-person personal pronouns, but have innovated a separate set of third-person pronouns by borrowing the demonstrative ille ("that (over there)"), and creating a separate reinforced demonstrative by attaching a variant of ecce "behold!" (or "here is ...") to the pronoun. Similarly, in place of the genitive of the Latin pronouns, the Romance languages adopted the reflexive possessive, which then serves indifferently as both reflexive and non-reflexive possessive. Note that the reflexive, and hence the third-person possessive, is unmarked for the gender of the person being referred to. Hence, although gendered possessive forms do existe.g. Portuguese seu (masc.) vs. sua (fem. )these refer to the gender of the object possessed, not the possessor. The gender of the possessor needs to be made clear by a collocation such as French la voiture lui/elle, Portuguese o carro dele/dela, literally "the car of him/her". (In spoken Brazilian Portuguese, these collocations are the usual way of expressing the third-person possessive, since the former possessive seu carro now has the meaning "your car".) The same demonstrative ille was borrowed to create the definite article (see below), which explains the similarity in form between personal pronoun and definite article. When the two are different, it is usually because of differing degrees of phonetic reduction. Generally, the personal pronoun is unreduced (beyond normal sound change), while the article has suffered various amounts of reduction, e.g. Spanish ella "she" < illa vs. la "the (fem.)" < -la < illa. Clitic pronounsEdit Object pronouns in Latin were normal words, but in the Romance languages they have become clitic forms, which must stand adjacent to a verb and merge phonologically with it. Originally, object pronouns could come either before or after the verb; sound change would often produce different forms in these two cases, with numerous additional complications and contracted forms when multiple clitic pronouns cooccurred. Catalan still largely maintains this system with a highly complex clitic pronoun system. Most languages, however, have simplified this system by undoing some of the clitic mergers and requiring clitics to stand in a particular position relative to the verb (usually after imperatives, before other finite forms, and either before or after non-finite forms depending on the language). When a pronoun cannot serve as a clitic, a separate disjunctive form is used. These result from dative object pronouns pronounced with stress (which causes them to develop differently from the equivalent unstressed pronouns), or from subject pronouns. Most Romance languages are null subject languages. The subject pronouns are used only for emphasis and take the stress, and as a result are not clitics. In French, however (as in Friulian and in some Gallo-Italian languages of northern Italy), verbal agreement marking has degraded to the point that subject pronouns have become mandatory, and have turned into clitics. These forms cannot be stressed, so for emphasis the disjunctive pronouns must be used in combination with the clitic subject forms. Friulian and the Gallo-Italian languages have actually gone further than this and merged the subject pronouns onto the verb as a new type of verb agreement marking, which must be present even when there is a subject noun phrase. (Some non-standard varieties of French treat disjunctive pronouns as arguments and clitic pronouns as agreement markers.) Familiarformal distinctionEdit In medieval times, most Romance languages developed a distinction between familiar and polite second-person pronouns (a so-called T-V distinction), similar to the former English distinction between familiar "thou" and polite "you". As in English, this generally developed by appropriating the plural second-person pronoun to serve in addition as a polite singular. French is still at this stage, with familiar singular tu vs. formal or plural vous. In cases like this, the pronoun requires plural agreement in all cases whenever a single affix marks both person and number (as in verb agreement endings and object and possessive pronouns), but singular agreement elsewhere where appropriate (e.g. vous-mme "yourself" vs. vous-mmes "yourselves"). Many languages, however, innovated further in developing an even more polite pronoun, generally composed of a noun phrase (e.g. Portuguese vossa merc "your mercy", progressively reduced to vossemec, vosmec and finally voc) and taking third-person singular agreement. A plural equivalent was created at the same time or soon after (Portuguese vossas mercs, reduced to vocs), taking third-person plural agreement. Spanish innovated similarly, with usted(es) from earlier vuestra(s) merced(es). In Portuguese and Spanish (as in other languages with similar forms), the "extra-polite" forms in time came to be the normal polite forms, and the former polite (or plural) second-person vos knocked down to a familiar form, either becoming a familiar plural (as in European Spanish) or a familiar singular (as in many varieties of Latin American Spanish). In the latter case, it either competes with the original familiar singular tu (as in Guatemala), displaces it entirely (as in Argentina), or is itself displaced (as in Mexico, except in Chiapas). In American Spanish, the gap created by the loss of familiar plural vos was filled by originally polite ustedes, with the result that there is no familiar/polite distinction in the plural, just as in the original tu/vos system. A similar path was followed by Italian and Romanian. Romanian uses dumneavoastr "your lordship", while Italian the former polite phrase sua eccellenza "your excellency" has simply been supplanted by the corresponding pronoun Ella or Lei (literally "she", but capitalized when meaning "you"). As in European Spanish, the original second-person plural voi serves as familiar plural. (In Italy, during fascist times leading up to World War II, voi was resurrected as a polite singular, and discarded again afterwards, although it remains in some southern dialects.) Portuguese innovated again in developing a new extra-polite pronoun o senhor "the sir", which in turn downgraded voc. Hence, modern European Portuguese has a three-way distinction between "familiar" tu, "equalizing" voc and "polite" o senhor. (The original second-person plural vs was discarded centuries ago in speech, and is used today only in translations of the Bible, where tu and vs serve as universal singular and plural pronouns, respectively.) Brazilian Portuguese, however, has diverged from this system, and most dialects simply use voc (and plural vocs) as a general-purpose second person pronoun, combined with te (from tu) as the clitic object pronoun. The form o senhor is sometimes used in speech, but only in situations where an English speaker would say "sir" or "ma'am". The result is that second-person verb forms have disappeared, and the whole pronoun system has been radically realigned. However that is the case only in the spoken language of central and southern Brazil, with the northern areas of the country still largely preserving the second person verb form and the "tu" and "voc" distinction. = Latin had no articles as such. The closest definite article was the non-specific demonstrative is, ea, id meaning approximately "this/that/the". The closest indefinite articles were the indefinite determiners aliqu, aliqua, aliquod "some (non-specific)" and certus "a certain". Romance languages have both indefinite and definite articles, but none of the above words form the basis for either of these. Usually the definite article is derived from the Latin demonstrative ille ("that"), but some languages (e.g. Sardinian, and some dialects spoken around the Pyrenees) have forms from ipse (emphatic, as in "I myself"). The indefinite article everywhere is derived from the number nus ("one"). Some languages, e.g. French and Italian, have a partitive article that approximately translates as "some". This is used either with mass nouns or with plural nounsboth cases where the indefinite article cannot occur. A partitive article is used (and in French, required) whenever a bare noun refers to specific (but unspecified or unknown) quantity of the noun, but not when a bare noun refers to a class in general. For example, the partitive would be used in both of the following sentences: I want milk. Men arrived today. But neither of these: Milk is good for you. I hate men. The sentence "Men arrived today", however, (presumably) means "some specific men arrived today" rather than "men, as a general class, arrived today" (which would mean that there were no men before today). On the other hand, "I hate men" does mean "I hate men, as a general class" rather than "I hate some specific men". As in many other cases, French has developed the farthest from Latin in its use of articles. In French, nearly all nouns, singular and plural, must be accompanied by an article (either indefinite, definite, or partitive) or demonstrative pronoun. Due to pervasive sound changes, most nouns are pronounced identically in the singular and plural, and there is often heavy homonymy between nouns and identically pronounced words of other classes. For example, all of the following are pronounced /s/: sain "healthy"; saint "saint, holy"; sein "breast"; ceins "(you) put on, gird"; ceint "(he) puts on, girds"; ceint "put on, girded"; and the equivalent noun and adjective plural forms sains, saints, seins, ceints. The article helps identify the noun forms saint or sein, and distinguish singular from plural; likewise, the mandatory subject of verbs helps identify the verb ceint. In more conservative Romance languages, neither articles nor subject pronouns are necessary, since all of the above words are pronounced differently (In Italian, for example, the equivalents are sano, santo, seno, cingi, cinge, cinto, sani, santi, seni, cinti, where all vowels and consonants are pronounced as written, and s and c are clearly distinct from each other). Latin, at least originally, had a three-way distinction among demonstrative pronouns (hic iste ille) corresponding to first, second and third persons. Such a distinction is not reflected in modern English, but formerly existed as "this" vs. "that" vs. "yon(der)". In urban Latin of Rome, iste came to have a specifically derogatory meaning, but this innovation apparently did not reach the provinces and is not reflected in the modern Romance languages. A number of these languages still have such a three-way distinction, although hic has been lost and the other pronouns have shifted somewhat in meaning. For example, Spanish has este "this" vs. ese "that (near you)" vs. aquel (fem. aquella) "that (over yonder)". The Spanish pronouns derive, respectively, from Latin iste ipse accu-ille, where accu- is an emphatic prefix derived from eccum "behold it! ", possibly with influence from atque "and". Reinforced demonstratives such as accu-ille became necessary once ille came to be used as an article as well as a demonstrative. Such forms were often created even when not strictly needed to distinguish otherwise ambiguous forms. Italian, for example, has both questo "this" (eccu-istum) and quello "that" (eccu-illum), in addition to dialectal codesto "that (near you)" (eccu-t-istum). French generally prefers forms derived from bare ecce "behold", as in the pronoun ce "this one/that one" (earlier o, from ecce-hoc) and the determiner ce/cet "this/that" (earlier cest, from ecce-istum). Reinforced forms are likewise common in locative adverbs (words such as English here and there), based on related Latin forms such as hic "this" vs. hc "here", hc "this way", and ille "that" vs. illc "there", illc "that way". Here again French prefers bare ecce while Spanish and Italian prefer eccum (French ici "here" vs. Spanish aqu, Italian qui). In western languages such as Spanish, Portuguese and Catalan, doublets and triplets arose such as Portuguese aqui, ac, c "(to) here" (accu-hc, accu-hc, eccu-hc). From these, a prefix a- was extracted, from which forms like a "there (near you)" (a-(i)bi) and ali "there (over yonder)" (a-(i)llc) were created; compare Catalan neuter pronouns a (acce-hoc) "this", aix (a-(i)psum-hoc) "that (near you)", all (a-(i)llum-hoc) "that (yonder)". Subsequent changes often reduced the number of demonstrative distinctions. Standard Italian, for example, has only a two-way distinction "this" vs. "that", as in English, with second-person and third-person demonstratives combined. In Catalan, however, a former three-way distinction aquest, aqueix, aquell has recently been reduced differently, with first-person and second-person demonstratives combined. Hence aquest means either "this" or "that (near you)"; on the phone, aquest is used to refer both to speaker and addressee. Old French had a similar distinction to Italian (cist/cest vs. cil/cel), both of which could function as either adjectives or pronouns. Modern French, however, has no distinction between "this" and "that": ce/cet, cette < cest, ceste is only an adjective, and celui, celle < cel lui, celle is only a pronoun, and both forms indifferently mean either "this" or "that". (The distinction between "this" and "that" can be made, if necessary, by adding the suffixes -ci "here" or -l "there", e.g. cette femme-ci "this woman" vs. cette femme-l "that woman", but this is rarely done except when specifically necessary to distinguish two entities from each other.) Verbs have many conjugations, including in most languages: A present tense, a preterite, an imperfect, a pluperfect, a future tense and a future perfect in the indicative mood, for statements of fact. Present and preterite subjunctive tenses, for hypothetical or uncertain conditions. Several languages (for example, Italian, Portuguese and Spanish) have also imperfect and pluperfect subjunctives, although it is not unusual to have just one subjunctive equivalent for preterit and imperfect (e.g. no unique subjunctive equivalent in Italian of the so-called passato remoto). Portuguese, and until recently Spanish, also have future and future perfect subjunctives, which have no equivalent in Latin. An imperative mood, for direct commands. Three non-finite forms: infinitive, gerund, and past participle. Distinct active and passive voices, as well as an impersonal passive voice. Note that, although these categories are largely inherited from Classical Latin, many of the forms are either newly constructed or inherited from different categories (e.g. the Romance imperfect subjunctive most commonly is derived from the Latin pluperfect subjunctive, while the Romance pluperfect subjunctive is derived from a new present perfect tense with the auxiliary verb placed in the imperfect subjunctive). Several tenses and aspects, especially of the indicative mood, have been preserved with little change in most languages, as shown in the following table for the Latin verb dcere (to say), and its descendants. 1The spelling is conservative. Note the pronunciations: dire /di/, dit /di/, disait /diz/, dise /diz/, dis /di/. 2Until the eighteenth century. 3With the disused variant dize. 4long infinitive 5In modern times, scheva. 6Derived from the unrelated Latin verb narrre "to tell (a story)". Note also the pronunciations: narrer /narrere/, narat /narada/, at naradu /a nnaradu/, naraiat /naraiada/, nabat /nabata/, nerzat /nertsada/, niet /niete/, nara /nara/. 7Sicilian now uses imperfect subjunctive dicissi in place of present subjunctive. The main tense and mood distinctions that were made in classical Latin are generally still present in the modern Romance languages, though many are now expressed through compound rather than simple verbs. The passive voice, which was mostly synthetic in classical Latin, has been completely replaced with compound forms. Owing to sound changes which made it homophonous with the preterite, the Latin future indicative tense was dropped, and replaced with a periphrasis of the form infinitive + present tense of habre (to have). Eventually, this structure was reanalysed as a new future tense. In a similar process, an entirely new conditional form was created. While the synthetic passive voice of classical Latin was abandoned in favour of periphrastic constructions, most of the active voice remained in use. However, several tenses have changed meaning, especially subjunctives. For example: The Latin pluperfect indicative became a conditional in Sicilian, and an imperfect subjunctive in Spanish. The Latin pluperfect subjunctive developed into an imperfect subjunctive in all languages except Romansh, where it became a conditional, and Romanian, where it became a pluperfect indicative. The Latin preterite subjunctive, together with the future perfect indicative, became a future subjunctive in Old Spanish, Portuguese, and Galician. The Latin imperfect subjunctive became a personal infinitive in Portuguese and Galician. Many Romance languages have two verbs "to be". One is derived from Vulgar Latin *essere < Latin esse "to be" with an admixture of forms derived from sedre "to sit", and is used mostly for essential attributes; the other is derived from stre "to stand", and mostly used for temporary states. This development is most notable in Spanish, Portuguese and Catalan. In French, Italian and Romanian, the derivative of stre largely preserved an earlier meaning of "to stand/to stay", although in modern Italian, stare is used in a few constructions where English would use "to be", as in sto bene "I am well". In Old French, the derivatives of *essere and stre were estre and ester, respectively. In modern French, estre persists as tre "to be" while ester has been lost as a separate verb; but the former imperfect of ester is used as the modern imperfect of tre (e.g. il tait "he was"), replacing the irregular forms derived from Latin (e.g. ere(t), iere(t) < erat). In Italian, the two verbs share the same past participle, stato. sedre persists most notably in the future of *essere (e.g. Spanish/Portuguese/French/etc. ser-, Italian sar-), although in Old French the future is a direct derivation from Latin, e.g. (i)ert "he will be" < erit. See Romance copula for further information. For a more detailed illustration of how the verbs have changed with respect to classical Latin, see Romance verbs. During the Renaissance, Italian, Portuguese, Spanish and a few other Romance languages developed a progressive aspect which did not exist in Latin. In French, progressive constructions remain very limited, the imperfect generally being preferred, as in Latin. Many Romance languages now have a verbal construction analogous to the present perfect of English. In some, it has taken the place of the old preterite (at least in the vernacular); in others, the two coexist with somewhat different meanings (cf. English I did vs. I have done). A few examples: preterite only: Galician, Asturian, Sicilian, Leonese, Portuguese, some dialects of Spanish; preterite and present perfect: Catalan, Occitan, standard Spanish; present perfect predominant, preterite now literary: French, Romanian, several dialects of Italian, some dialects of Spanish; present perfect only: Romansh Note that in Catalan, the synthetic preterite is predominantly a literary tense, except in Valencian; but an analytic preterite (formed using an auxiliary vad, which in other languages signals the future) persists in speech, with the same meaning. In Portuguese, a morphological present perfect does exist but has a different meaning (closer to "I have been doing"), and is rare in practice. The following are common features of the Romance languages (inherited from Vulgar Latin) that are different from Classical Latin: Adjectives generally follow the noun they modify. The normal clause structure is SVO, rather than SOV, and is much less flexible than in Latin. Many Latin constructions involving nominalized verbal forms (e.g. the use of accusative plus infinitive in indirect discourse and the use of the ablative absolute) were dropped in favor of constructions with subordinate clause. Exceptions can be found in Italian, for example, Latin tempore permittente > Italian tempo permettendo; L. hoc facto > I. ci fatto. = Romance languages have borrowed heavily, though mostly from other Romance languages. However, some, such as Spanish, Portuguese, Romanian, and French, have borrowed heavily from other language groups. Vulgar Latin borrowed first from indigenous languages of the Roman empire, and during the Germanic folk movements, from Germanic languages, especially Gothic. Notable examples are *blancus "white", replacing native albus (but Romansh alv, Dalmatian jualb, Romanian alb); *guerra "war", replacing native bellum; and the words for the cardinal directions, where cognates of English "north", "south", "east" and "west" replaced the native words septentri, merdis (also "noon; midday nap"; cf. Romanian meriz), oriens, and occidens. (See History of French The Franks.) Some Celtic words were incorporated into the core vocabulary, partly for words with no Latin equivalent (betulla "birch", camisia "shirt", cerevisia "beer"), but in some cases replacing Latin vocabulary (gladius "sword", replacing ensis; cambire "to exchange", replacing mtre except in Romanian and Portuguese; carrus "cart", replacing currus; pettia "piece", largely displacing pars (later resurrected) and eliminating frustum). Many Greek words also entered the lexicon. e.g. spatha "sword" (replacing gladius which shifted to "iris", cf. French pe, Spanish espada, Italian spada and Romanian spad); cara "face" (partly replacing facis); colpe "blow" (replacing ictus, cf. Spanish golpe, French coup); cata "each" (replacing quisque); common suffixes *-ijre/-izre (French oyer/-iser, Spanish -ear/-izar, Italian -eggiare/-izzare, etc. ), -ista. = Many basic nouns and verbs, especially those that were short or had irregular morphology, were replaced by longer derived forms with regular morphology. Nouns, and sometimes adjectives, were often replaced by diminutives, e.g. auris "ear" > auricula (orig. "outer ear") > oricla (Sardinian origra, Italian orecchia/o, Portuguese orelha, etc. ); avis "bird" > avicellus (orig. "chick, nestling") > aucellu (Occitan aucl, Friulian ucel, French oiseau, etc. ); caput "head" > capitium (Portuguese cabea, Spanish cabeza, French chevet "headboard"; but reflexes of caput were retained also, sometimes without change of meaning); vetus "old" > vetulus > veclus (Dalmatian vieklo, Italian vecchio, Portuguese velho, etc.). Sometimes augmentative constructions were used instead: piscis "fish" > Old French peis > peisson (orig. "big fish") > French poisson. Verbs were often replaced by frequentative constructions: canere "to sing" > cantre; iacere "to throw" > iactre > *iectre (Italian gettare, Portuguese jeitar, Spanish echar, etc. ); iuvre > aditre (Italian aiutare, Spanish ayudar, French aider, etc. ); vnr "hunt" > replaced by *captire "to hunt", frequentative of capere "to seize" (Italian cacciare, Portuguese caar, Romansh catschar, French chasser, etc.). Many Classical Latin words became archaic or poetic and were replaced by more colloquial terms: equus "horse" > caballus (orig. "nag") (but equa "mare" remains, cf. Spanish yegua); domus "house" > casa (orig. "hut"); ignis "fire" > focus (orig. "hearth"); strta "street" > rga (orig. "furrow") or callis (orig. "footpath") (but strta is continued in Italian strada). In some cases, terms from common occupations became generalized: invenre "to find" > Ibero-Romance (f)afflre (orig. "to sniff out", in hunting, cf. Spanish hallar, Portuguese achar); advenre "to arrive" > Ibero-Romance plicre (orig. "to fold (sails)", cf. Spanish llegar, Portuguese chegar), elsewhere arripre (orig. "to harbor at a riverbank", cf. Italian arrivare, French arriver) (advenre is continued with the meaning "to achieve, manage to do"; cf. Middle French aveindre) . The same thing sometimes happened to religious terms, due to the pervasive influence of Christianity: loqu "to speak" > parabolre (orig. "to tell parables", cf. Occitan paraular, French parler, Italian parlare ) or fabulr (orig. "to tell stories", cf. Spanish hablar, Portuguese falar), based on Jesus' way of speaking in parables. Many prepositions were used as verbal particles to make new roots and verb stems, e.g. Italian estrarre "to extract" from Latin ex- "out of" and trahere "to pull" (Italian trarre), or to augment already existing words, e.g. French coudre, Italian cucire, Portuguese coser "to sew", from cnsuere "to sew up", from suere "to sew", with total loss of the bare stem. Many prepositions weakened and commonly became compounded, e.g. de ex > French ds "as of", ab ante > Italian avanti "forward". Some words derived from phrases, e.g. Portuguese agora, Spanish ahora "now" < hc hr "at this hour"; French avec "with" (prep.) < Old French avuec (adv.) < ab hoc "away from that"; Spanish tamao, Portuguese tamanho "size" < tam magnum "so big"; Italian codesto "this, that" (near you) < Old Italian cotevesto < eccum tibi istum approx. "here's that thing of yours"; Portuguese voc "you" < vosmec < vossemec < Old Portuguese vossa mercee "your mercy". A number of common Latin words that have disappeared in many or most Romance languages have survived either in the periphery or in remote corners (especially Sardinia and Romania). For example, Latin caseum "cheese" in the more outer places (Portuguese queijo, Spanish queso, Romansh caschiel, Sardinian csu, Romanian ca), but in the central areas has been replaced by formticum, originally "moulded (cheese)" (French fromage, Occitan/Catalan formatge, Italian formaggio); similarly (com)edere "to eat (up)", which survives as Spanish/Portuguese comer but elsewhere is replaced by mandcre, originally "to chew" (French manger, Italian mangiare). In some cases, one language happens to preserve a word displaced elsewhere, e.g. Italian ogni "everything" < omnes, displaced elsewhere by ttum, originally "whole"; Friulian va "to cry" < flere "to weep"; Vegliote otijemna "fishing pole" < antenna "yardarm". Sardinian in particular preserves many words entirely lost elsewhere, e.g. emmo "yes" < immo "rather/yes/no", mannu "big" < magnus, narare "to say" < narrre "to tell", and domo "house" < (abl.) dom "at home". Sardinian even preserves some words that were already archaic in Classical Latin, e.g. china "grape" < acinam. = During the Middle Ages, scores of words were borrowed directly from Classical Latin (so-called Latinisms), either in their original form (learned loans) or in a somewhat nativized form (semi-learned loans). These resulted in many doubletspairs of inherited and learned wordssuch as those in the table below: Sometimes triplets arise: Latin articulus "joint" > Portuguese artculo "joint, knuckle" (learned), artigo "article" (semi-learned), artelho "ankle" (inherited; archaic and dialectal). In many cases, the learned word simply displaced the original popular word: e.g. Spanish crudo "crude, raw" (Old Spanish cruo); French lgume "vegetable" (Old French lem); Portuguese flor "flower" (Old Portuguese chor). The learned loan always looks more like the original than the inherited word does, because regular sound change has been bypassed; likewise, it usually has a meaning closer to the original. Borrowing from Classical Latin has produced a large number of suffix doublets. Examples from Spanish (learned form first): -cin vs. -zon; -cia vs. -za; -ificar vs. -iguar; -izar vs. -ear; -mento vs. -miento; -tud (< nominative -td) vs. -dumbre (< accusative -tdine); -culo vs. -ejo; etc. Similar examples can be found in all the other Romance languages. This borrowing also introduced large numbers of classical prefixes in their original form (dis-, ex-, post-, trans-) and reinforced many others (re-, popular Spanish/Portuguese des- < dis-, popular French d- < dis-, popular Italian s- < ex-). Many Greek prefixes and suffixes (hellenisms) also found their way into the lexicon: tele-, poli-/poly-, meta-, pseudo-, -scope/scopo, -logie/logia/loga, etc. Significant sound changes affected the consonants of the Romance languages. = There was a tendency to eliminate final consonants in Vulgar Latin, either by dropping them (apocope) or adding a vowel after them (epenthesis). Many final consonants were rare, occurring only in certain prepositions (e.g. ad "towards", apud "at, near (a person)"), conjunctions (sed "but"), demonstratives (e.g. illud "that (over there)", hoc "this"), and nominative singular noun forms, especially of neuter nouns (e.g. lac "milk", mel "honey", cor "heart"). Many of these prepositions and conjunctions were replaced by others, while the nouns were regularized into forms that avoided the final consonants (e.g. *lacte, *mele, *core). Final -m was dropped in Vulgar Latin. Even in Classical Latin, final -am, -um (accusative endings) was often elided in poetic meter, suggesting the m was weakly pronounced, probably marking the nasalisation of the vowel before it. This nasal vowel lost its nasalization in the Romance languages except in monosyllables, where it became /n/ (cf. Spanish quien < quem, French rien < rem). As a result, only the following final consonants occurred in Vulgar Latin: Final -t in third-person singular verb forms, and -nt (often reduced to -n) in third-person plural verb forms. Final -s in a large number of morphological endings (verb endings -s/-s/-s/-is, -mus, -tis; nominative singular -us/-is; plural -s/-s/-s) and certain other words (trs "three", crs "tomorrow", etc.). Final -n in some monosyllables (from earlier -m), and where -nt reduced to -n. Final -r, -d in some prepositions (e.g. ad, per), which were proclitic forms that attached phonologically to the following word. Very occasionally, final -c, e.g. Occitan oc "yes" < hoc (possibly protected by a final epenthetic vowel at one point). Final -t was eventually dropped in many languages, although this often occurred several centuries after the Vulgar Latin period. For example, the reflex of -t was dropped in Old French and Old Spanish only around AD 1100. In Old French, this occurred only when a vowel still preceded the consonant. Hence venit "he comes" > Old French vient, and the /t/ was never dropped. (It survives to this day in liaison forms, e.g. vient-il? "is he coming?" /vjti(l)/.) In Italo-Romance and Eastern Romance, eventually all final consonants were either dropped or protected by an epenthetic vowel, except in clitic forms (e.g. prepositions con, per). Modern Italian still has almost no consonant-final words, although Romanian has resurfaced them through later loss of final /u/. For example, ams "you love" > ame > ami; amant "they love" > *aman > amano. On the evidence of "sloppily written" Langobardic documents, however, the loss of final /s/ did not occur until the seventh or eighth century AD, after the Vulgar Latin period, and the presence of many former final consonants is betrayed by the syntactic gemination (raddoppiamento sintattico) that they trigger. It is also thought that /s/ became /j/ rather than simply disappearing: ns > noi "we", s(ed)s > sei "you are", crs > crai "tomorrow" (southern Italian). In unstressed syllables, the resulting diphthongs were simplified: amcs > /amikai/ > amiche /amike/ "(female) friends", where nominative amcae should produce **amice rather than amiche (masculine amc > amici not **amichi). Central Western Romance languages eventually regained a large number of final consonants through the general loss of final /e/ and /o/, e.g. Catalan llet "milk" < lactem, foc "fire" < focum, peix "fish" < piscem. In French, most of these secondary final consonants were lost, but tertiary final consonants later arose through the loss of // < -a. Hence masculine frigidum "cold" > Old French /froit/ > froid /fwa/, feminine frigidam > Old French /froid/ > froide /fwad/. = Palatalization was one of the most important processes affecting consonants in Vulgar Latin. This eventually resulted in a whole series of "palatal" and postalveolar consonants in most Romance languages, e.g. Italian //, //, /t/, /d/, /ts/, /dz/, //, //. The following historical stages occurred: Note how the environments become progressively less "palatal", and the languages affected become progressively fewer. The outcomes of palatalization depended on the historical stage, the consonants involved, and the languages involved. The primary division is between the Western Romance languages, with /ts/ resulting from palatalization of /k/, and the remaining languages (Italo-Romance and Eastern Romance) with /t/ resulting. It is often suggested that /t/ was the original result in all languages, with /t/ > /ts/ a later innovation in the Western Romance languages. Evidence of this is the fact that Italian has both /tt/ and /tts/ as outcomes of palatalization in different environments, while Western Romance has only /(t)ts/. Even more suggestive is the fact that Mozarabic, in southern Spain, had /t/ as the outcome despite being in the "Western Romance" area and geographically disconnected from the remaining /t/ areas; this suggests that Mozarabic was an outlying "relic" area where the change /t/ > /ts/ failed to reach. (Northern French dialects, such as Norman and Picard, also had /t/, but this may be a secondary development, i.e. due to a later sound change /ts/ > /t/.) Note that /ts,dz,d/ eventually became /s,z,/ in most Western Romance languages. Thus Latin caelum (sky, heaven), pronounced [kailu(m)] with an initial [k], became Italian cielo [tlo], Romanian cer [ter], Spanish cielo [jelo]/[sjelo], French ciel [sjl], Catalan cel [s], and Portuguese cu [sw]. The outcome of palatalized /d/ and /g/ is less clear: Original /j/ has the same outcome as palatalized /g/ everywhere. Romanian fairly consistently has /z/ < /dz/ from palatalized /d/, but /d/ from palatalized /g/. Italian inconsistently has /ddz~dd/ from palatalized /d/, and /dd/ from palatalized /g/. Most other languages have the same results for palatalized /d/ and /g/: consistent /d/ initially, but either /j/ or /d/ medially (depending on language and exact context). But Spanish has /j/ initially except before /o/, /u/; nearby Gascon is similar. This suggests that palatalized /d/ > /d/ > either /j/ or /dz/ depending on location, while palatalized /g/ > /j/; after this, /j/ > /(d)d/ in most areas, but Spanish and Gascon (originating from isolated districts behind the western Pyrenees) were relic areas unaffected by this change. In French, the outcomes of /k/ palatalized by /e,i,j/ and by /a/ were different: centum "hundred" > cent /s/ but cantum "song" > chant //. The original outcomes of palatalization must have continued to be phonetically palatalized even after they had developed into alveolar/postalveolar/etc. consonants. This is clear from French, where all originally palatalized consonants triggered the development of a following glide /j/ in certain circumstances (most visible in the endings -re, -tum/tam). In some cases this /j/ came from a consonant palatalized by an adjoining consonant after the late loss of a separating vowel. For example, mansintam > /masonata/ > masnada/ > /masn/ > early Old French maisniee /maisni/ "household". Similarly, medittem > /mejetate/ > /mejtade/ > /mejte/ > early Old French meitie /mejt/ > modern French moiti /mwatje/ "half". In both cases, phonetic palatalization must have remained in primitive Old French at least through the time when unstressed intertonic vowels were lost (c. eighth century AD? ), well after the fragmentation of the Romance languages. The effect of palatalization is indicated in the writing systems of almost all Romance languages, where the letters c g have the "hard" pronunciation [k ] in most situations, but a "soft" pronunciation (e.g. French/Portuguese [s ], Italian/Romanian [t d]) before e i y. (Because Middle English was originally written by scribes speaking Norman French, the English spelling system has the same peculiarity.) This has the effect of keeping the modern spelling similar to the original Latin spelling, but complicates the relationship between sound and letter. In particular, the hard sounds must be written differently before e i y (e.g. Italian ch gh, Portuguese qu gu), and likewise for the soft sounds when not before these letters (e.g. Italian ci gi, Portuguese j). Furthermore, in Spanish, Catalan, Occitan and Brazilian Portuguese, the use of u to signal the hard pronunciation before e i y means that a different spelling is also needed to signal the sounds /kw w/ before these letters (Spanish cu g, Catalan, Occitan and Brazilian Portuguese q g). This produces a number of orthographic alternations in verbs whose pronunciation is entirely regular. The following are examples of corresponding first-person plural indicative and subjunctive in a number of regular Portuguese verbs: marcamos marquemos "we mark"; caamos cacemos "we hunt"; chegamos cheguemos "we arrive"; averiguamos averigemos "we verify"; adequamos adeqemos "we adapt"; oferecemos ofereamos "we offer"; dirigimos dirijamos "we drive" erguemos ergamos "we raise"; delinquimos delincamos "we commit a crime". = Stop consonants shifted by lenition in Vulgar Latin. The voiced labial consonants /b/ and /w/ (represented by b and v, respectively) both developed a fricative [] as an intervocalic allophone. This is clear from the orthography; in medieval times, the spelling of a consonantal v is often used for what had been a b in Classical Latin, or the two spellings were used interchangeably. In many Romance languages (Italian, French, Portuguese, Romanian, etc. ), this fricative later developed into a /v/; but in others (Spanish, Galician, some Catalan and Occitan dialects, etc.) reflexes of /b/ and /w/ simply merged into a single phoneme. Several other consonants were "softened" in intervocalic position in Western Romance (Spanish, Portuguese, French, Northern Italian), but normally not phonemically in the rest of Italy (except some cases of "elegant" or Ecclesiastical words), nor apparently at all in Romanian. The dividing line between the two sets of dialects is called the La SpeziaRimini Line and is one of the most important isoglosses of the Romance dialects. The changes (instances of diachronic lenition) are as follows: Single voiceless plosives became voiced: -p-, -t-, -c- > -b-, -d-, -g-. Subsequently, in some languages they were further weakened, either becoming fricatives or approximants, [], [], [] (as in Spanish) or disappearing entirely (as /t/ and /k/, but not /p/, in French). The following example shows progressive weakening of original /t/: e.g. vtam > Italian vita [vita], Portuguese vida [vid] (European Portuguese [vi]), Spanish vida [bia], French vie [vi]. These sound changes may be due in part to the influence of Continental Celtic languages. The voiced plosives /d/ and // tended to disappear. The plain sibilant -s- [s] was also voiced to [z] between vowels, although in many languages its spelling has not changed. (In Spanish, intervocalic [z] was later devoiced back to [s]; [z] is only found as an allophone of /s/ before voiced consonants in Modern Spanish.) The double plosives became single: -pp-, -tt-, -cc-, -bb-, -dd-, -gg- > -p-, -t-, -c-, -b-, -d-, -g- in most languages. In French spelling, double consonants are merely etymological, except for -ll- after -i (pronounced [ij]), in most cases. The double sibilant -ss- [s] also became phonetically single [s], although in many languages its spelling has not changed. Consonant length is no longer phonemically distinctive in most Romance languages. However some languages of Italy (Italian, Sardinian, Sicilian, and numerous other varieties of central and southern Italy) do have long consonants like //, /dd/, /bb/, /kk/, /tt/, /pp/, /ll/, /mm/, /nn/, /ss/, and to a lesser extent /rr/, etc., where the doubling indicates a short hold before the consonant is released, in many cases with distinctive lexical value: e.g. note /n.te/ (notes) vs. notte /nt.te/ (night), cade /ka.de/ (s/he, it falls) vs. cadde /kad.de/ (s/he, it fell). They may even occur at the beginning of words in Romanesco, Neapolitan and Sicilian, and are occasionally indicated in writing, e.g. Sicilian cchi (more), and cc (here). In general, the consonants /b/, /ts/, and /dz/ are long at the start of a word, while the archiphoneme |R| is realised as a trill /r/ in the same position. A few languages have regained secondary geminate consonants. The double consonants of Piedmontese exist only after stressed //, written , and are not etymological: vdde (Latin vidre, to see), scca (Latin sicca, dry, feminine of sech). In standard Catalan and Occitan, there exists a geminate sound /l/ written l (Catalan) or ll (Occitan), but it is usually pronounced as a simple sound in colloquial (and even some formal) speech in both languages. = In Western Romance, an epenthetic or prosthetic vowel was inserted at the beginning of any word that began with /s/ and another consonant: spatha "sword" > Spanish/Portuguese espada, Catalan espasa, Old French espee > modern pe; Stephanum "Stephen" > Spanish Esteban, Catalan Esteve, Portuguese Estvo, Old French Estievne > modern tienne; status "state" > Spanish/Portuguese estado, Catalan estat, Old French estat > modern tat; spiritus "spirit" > Spanish espritu, Portuguese esprito, Catalan esperit, French esprit. Epenthetic /e/ in Western Romance languages was also probably influenced by Continental Celtic languages. While Western Romance words undergo word-initial epenthesis, cognates in Italian do not: spatha > spada, Stephanum > Stefano, status > stato, spiritus > spirito. In Italian, syllabification rules were preserved instead by vowel-final articles, thus feminine spada as la spada, but instead of rendering the masculine *il spaghetto, lo spaghetto came to be the norm. Though receding at present, Italian once had an epenthetic /i/ if a consonant preceded such clusters, so that 'in Switzerland' was in /i/Svizzera. Some speakers still use the prosthetic /i/, and it is fossilized in a few set phrases as per iscritto 'in writing' (although in this case it has probably survived due to the influence of the separate word iscritto < Latin nscrptus). = One profound change that affected Vulgar Latin was the reorganisation of its vowel system. Classical Latin had five short vowels, , , , , , and five long vowels, , , , , , each of which was an individual phoneme (see the table in the right, for their likely pronunciation in IPA), and four diphthongs, ae, oe, au and eu (five according to some authors, including ui). There were also long and short versions of y, representing the rounded vowel /y()/ in Greek borrowings, which however probably came to be pronounced /i()/ even before Romance vowel changes started. There is evidence that in the imperial period all the short vowels except a differed by quality as well as by length from their long counterparts. So, for example was pronounced close-mid /e/ while was pronounced open-mid //, and was pronounced close /i/ while was pronounced near-close //. During the Proto-Romance period, phonemic length distinctions were lost. Vowels came to be automatically pronounced long in stressed, open syllables (i.e. when followed by only one consonant), and pronounced short everywhere else. This situation is still maintained in modern Italian: cade [kade] "he falls" vs. cadde [kadde] "he fell". The Proto-Romance loss of phonemic length originally produced a system with nine different quality distinctions in monophthongs, where only original / / had merged. Soon, however, many of these vowels coalesced: The simplest outcome was in Sardinian, where the former long and short vowels in Latin simply coalesced, e.g. / / > /e/, / / > /i/: This produced a simple five-vowel system /a e i o u/. In most areas, however (technically, the Italo-Western languages), the near-close vowels / / lowered and merged into the high-mid vowels /e o/. As a result, Latin pira "pear" and vra "true", came to rhyme (e.g. Italian and Spanish pera, vera, and Old French poire, voire). Similarly, Latin nucem (from nux "nut") and vcem (from vx "voice") become Italian noce, voce, Portuguese noz, voz, and French noix, voix. This produced a seven-vowel system /a e i o u/, still maintained in conservative languages such as Italian and Portuguese, and lightly transformed in Spanish (where // > /je/, // > /we/). In the Eastern Romance languages (particularly, Romanian), the front vowels / / evolved as in the majority of languages, but the back vowels / / evolved as in Sardinian. This produced an unbalanced six-vowel system: /a e i o u/. In modern Romanian, this system has been significantly transformed, with // > /je/ and with new vowels / / evolving, leading to a balanced seven-vowel system with central as well as front and back vowels: /a e i o u/. Sicilian is sometimes described as having its own distinct vowel system. In fact, Sicilian passed through the same developments as the main bulk of Italo-Western languages. Subsequently, however, high-mid vowels (but not low-mid vowels) were raised in all syllables, stressed and unstressed; i.e. /e o/ > /i u/. The result is a five-vowel /a i u/. The Proto-Romance allophonic vowel-length system was rephonemicized in the Gallo-Romance languages as a result of the loss of many final vowels. Some northern Italian languages (e.g. Friulan) still maintain this secondary phonemic length, but most languages dropped it by either diphthongizing or shortening the new long vowels. French phonemicized a third vowel length system around AD 1300 as a result of the sound change /VsC/ > /VhC/ > /VC/ (where V is any vowel and C any consonant). This vowel length was eventually lost by around AD 1700, but the former long vowels are still marked with a circumflex. A fourth vowel length system, still non-phonemic, has now arisen: All nasal vowels as well as the oral vowels / o / (which mostly derive from former long vowels) are pronounced long in all stressed closed syllables, and all vowels are pronounced long in syllables closed by the voiced fricatives /v z v/. This system in turn has been phonemicized in some non-standard dialects (e.g. Haitian Creole), as a result of the loss of final //. = The Latin diphthongs ae and oe, pronounced /ai/ and /oi/ in earlier Latin, were early on monophthongized. ae became // by the a.d. 1st century at the latest. Although this sound was still distinct from all existing vowels, the neutralization of Latin vowel length eventually caused its merger with // < short e: e.g. caelum "sky" > French ciel, Spanish/Italian cielo, Portuguese cu /sw/, with the same vowel as in mele "honey" > French/Spanish miel, Italian miele, Portuguese mel /ml/. Some words show an early merger of ae with /e/, as in praeda "booty" > Gallo-Romance /prea/ > Old French preie (vs. expected **prie) > French proie "prey"; or faenum "hay" > fnum [fenu] > Spanish heno, French foin. oe generally merged with /e/: poenam "punishment" > Romance */pna/ > Spanish/Italian pena, French peine; foedus "ugly" > Romance */fdo/ > Spanish feo, Portuguese feio. There are relatively few such outcomes, since oe was rare in Classical Latin (most original instances had become Classical , as in Old Latin oinos "one" > Classical nus). au merged with [o] in the popular speech of Rome already by the 1st century b.c. A number of authors remarked on this explicitly, e.g. Cicero's taunt that the populist politician Publius Clodius Pulcher had changed his name from Claudius to ingratiate himself with the masses. This change never penetrated far from Rome, however, and the pronunciation /au/ was maintained for centuries in the vast majority of Latin-speaking areas, although it eventually developed into some variety of o in many languages. For example, Italian and French have // as the usual reflex, but this post-dates diphthongization of and the French-specific palatalization /ka/ > /ta/ (hence causa > French chose, Italian cosa /kza/ not *cuosa). Spanish has /o/, but Portuguese spelling maintains ou, only recently developed to /o/ (and still /ou/ in some dialects). Occitan, Romanian, southern Italian languages, and many other minority Romance languages still have /au/. A few common words, however, show an early merger with [o], evidently reflecting a generalization of the popular Roman pronunciation: e.g. French queue, Italian coda /koda/, Occitan co(d)a, Romanian coad (all meaning "tail") must all derive from cda rather than Classical cauda. Similarly, Portuguese orelha, French oreille, Romanian ureche, and Sardinian olcra, orcla "ear" must derive from oricla rather than Classical auris, and the form oricla is in fact reflected in the Appendix Probi (but Occitan aurelha reflects auricla, probably influenced by ausir "to hear"). = MetaphonyEdit An early process that operated in all Romance languages to varying degrees was metaphony (vowel mutation), conceptually similar to the umlaut process so characteristic of the Germanic languages. Depending on the language, certain stressed vowels were raised (or sometimes diphthongized) either by a final /i/ or /u/ or by a directly following /j/. Metaphony is most extensive in the Italo-Romance languages, and applies to nearly all languages in Italy; however, it is absent from Tuscan, and hence from standard Italian. In many languages affected by metaphony, a distinction exists between final /u/ (from most cases of Latin -um) and final /o/ (from Latin -, -ud and some cases of -um, esp. masculine "mass" nouns), and only the former triggers metaphony. Some examples: In Servigliano, in the Marches of Italy, stressed / e o/ are raised to /e i o u/ before final /i/ or /u/: /metto/ "I put" vs. /mitti/ "you put" (< *metti < *mettes < Latin mittis); /modsta/ "modest (fem.)" vs. /modestu/ "modest (masc. )"; /kwesto/ "this (neut.)" (< Latin eccum istud) vs. /kwistu/ "this (masc.)" (< Latin eccum istum). Calvallo, in the Basilicata region of southern Italy, is similar, but the low-mid vowels / / are diphthongized to /je wo/ rather than raised: /mette/ "he puts" vs. /mitti/ "you put", but /pno/ "I think" vs. /pjeni/ "you think". Metaphony also occurs in most northern Italian dialects, but only by (usually lost) final *i; apparently, final *u was lowered to *o (usually lost) before metaphony could take effect. Some of the Astur-Leonese dialects, in northern Spain, have the same distinction between final /o/ and /u/ as in the Central-Southern Italian languages, with /u/ triggering metaphony. The plural of masculine nouns in these dialects ends in -os, which does not trigger metaphony, unlike in the singular (vs. Italian plural -i, which does trigger metaphony). Sardinian has allophonic raising of mid vowels / / to [e o] before final /i/ or /u/. This has been phonemicized in the Campidanese dialect as a result of the raising of final /e o/ to /i u/. Raising of // to /o/ occurs sporadically in Portuguese in the masculine singular, e.g. porco /porku/ "pig" vs. porcos /prkus/ "pig". It is thought that Old Portuguese at one point had singular /u/ vs. plural /os/, exactly as in modern Astur-Leonese. In all of the Western Romance languages, final /i/ (primarily occurring in the first-person singular of the preterite) raised mid-high /e o/ to /i u/, e.g. Portuguese fiz "I did" (< *fidzi < *fedzi < Latin fc) vs. fez "he did" (< *fedze < Latin fcit). Old Spanish similarly had fize "I did" vs. fezo "he did" (-o by analogy with am "he loved"), but subsequently generalized stressed /i/, producing modern hice "I did" vs. hizo "he did". The same thing happened prehistorically in Old French, yielding fis "I did", fist "he did" (< *feist < Latin fcit). DiphthongizationEdit A number of languages diphthongized some of the free vowels, especially the low-mid vowels / /: Spanish consistently diphthongized all low-mid vowels / / > /je we/ except for before certain palatal consonants (which raised the vowels to high-mid before diphthongization took place). Romanian similarly diphthongized // to /je/ (the corresponding vowel // did not develop from Proto-Romance). Italian diphthongized // > /j/ and // > /w/ in open syllables (in the situations where vowels were lengthened in Proto-Romance). French similarly diphthongized / / in open syllables (when lengthened), along with /a e o/: /a e o/ > /a i ei u ou/ > middle OF /e je i we eu/ > modern /e je wa ~ ~ /. French also diphthongized / / before palatalized consonants, especially /j/. Further development was as follows: /j/ > /iej/ > /i/; /j/ > /uoj/ > early OF /uj/ > modern /i/. Catalan diphthongized / / before /j/ from palatalized consonants, just like French, with similar results: /j/ > /i/, /j/ > /uj/. These diphthongizations had the effect of reducing or eliminating the distinctions between low-mid and high-mid vowels in many languages. In Spanish and Romanian, all low-mid vowels were diphthongized, and the distinction disappeared entirely. Portuguese is the most conservative in this respect, keeping the seven-vowel system more or less unchanged (but with changes in particular circumstances, e.g. due to metaphony). Other than before palatalized consonants, Catalan keeps / o/ intact, but / e/ split in a complex fashion into / e / and then coalesced again in the standard dialect (Eastern Catalan) in such a way that most original / e/ have reversed their quality to become /e /. In French and Italian, the distinction between low-mid and high-mid vowels occurred only in closed syllables. Standard Italian more or less maintains this. In French, /e/ and // merged by the twelfth century or so, and the distinction between // and /o/ was eliminated without merging by the sound changes /u/ > /y/, /o/ > /u/. Generally this led to a situation where both [e,o] and [,] occur allophonically, with the high-mid vowels in open syllables and the low-mid vowels in closed syllables. This is still the situation in modern Spanish, for example. In French, however, both [e/] and [o/] were partly rephonemicized: Both /e/ and // occur in open syllables as a result of /aj/ > //, and both /o/ and // occur in closed syllables as a result of /al/ > /au/ > /o/. Old French also had numerous falling diphthongs resulting from diphthongization before palatal consonants or from a fronted /j/ originally following palatal consonants in Proto-Romance or later: e.g. pcem /patse/ "peace" > PWR */padze/ (lenition) > OF paiz /pajts/; *punctum "point" > Gallo-Romance */ponto/ > */pojto/ (fronting) > OF point /pjnt/. During the Old French period, preconsonantal /l/ [] vocalized to /w/, producing many new falling diphthongs: e.g. dulcem "sweet" > PWR */doltse/ > OF dolz /duts/ > douz /duts/; fallet "fails, is deficient" > OF falt > faut "is needed"; bellus "beautiful" > OF bels [bs] > beaus [baws]. By the end of the Middle French period, all falling diphthongs either monophthongized or switched to rising diphthongs: proto OF /aj j jj ej jej wj oj uj al l el il l ol ul/ > early OF /aj j i ej yj oj yj aw aw ew i w ow y/ > modern spelling ai ei i oi ui oi ui au eau eu i ou ou u > mod. French / i wa i wa i o o i u u y/. NasalizationEdit In both French and Portuguese, nasal vowels eventually developed from sequences of a vowel followed by a nasal consonant (/m/ or /n/). Originally, all vowels in both languages were nasalized before any nasal consonants, and nasal consonants not immediately followed by a vowel were eventually dropped. In French, nasal vowels before remaining nasal consonants were subsequently denasalized, but not before causing the vowels to lower somewhat, e.g. dnat "he gives" > OF dune /dun/ > donne /dn/, fminam > femme /fam/. Other vowels remained diphthongized, and were dramatically lowered: fnem "end" > fin /f/ (often pronounced [f]); linguam "tongue" > langue /l/; num "one" > un //, //. In Portuguese, /n/ between vowels was dropped, and the resulting hiatus eliminated through vowel contraction of various sorts, often producing diphthongs: manum, *mans > PWR *manu, manos "hand(s)" > mo, mos /mw, mws/; canem, cans "dog(s)" > PWR *kane, kanes > *can, canes > co, ces /kw, kjs/; ratinem, ratins "reason(s)" > PWR *radzone, radzones > *radzon, radzones > razo, razes /azw, azjs/ (Brazil), /az, zjs/ (Portugal). Sometimes the nasalization was eliminated: lna "moon" > Old Portuguese la > lua; vna "vein" > Old Portuguese va > veia. Nasal vowels that remained actually tend to be raised (rather than lowered, as in French): fnem "end" > fim /f/; centum "hundred" > PWR tsnto > cento /stu/; pontem "bridge" > PWR pnte > ponte /pti/ (Brazil), /pt/ (Portugal). In Portugal, vowels before a nasal consonant have become denasalized, but in Brazil they remain heavily nasalized. = Characteristic of the Gallo-Romance languages and Rhaeto-Romance languages are the front rounded vowels /y /. All of these languages show an unconditional change /u/ > /y/, e.g. lnam > French lune /lyn/, Occitan /lyno/. Many of the languages in Switzerland and Italy show the further change /y/ > /i/. Also very common is some variation of the French development / o/ (lengthened in open syllables) > /we ew/ > / /, with mid back vowels diphthongizing in some circumstances and then re-monophthongizing into mid-front rounded vowels. (French has both // and //, with // developing from // in certain circumstances.) There was more variability in the result of the unstressed vowels. Originally in Proto-Romance, the same nine vowels developed in unstressed as stressed syllables, and in Sardinian, they coalesced into the same five vowels in the same way. In Italo-Western Romance, however, vowels in unstressed syllables were significantly different from stressed vowels, with yet a third outcome for final unstressed syllables. In non-final unstressed syllables, the seven-vowel system of stressed syllables developed, but then the low-mid vowels / / merged into the high-mid vowels /e o/. This system is still preserved, largely or completely, in all of the conservative Romance languages (e.g. Italian, Spanish, Portuguese, Catalan). In final unstressed syllables, results were somewhat complex. One of the more difficult issues is the development of final short -u, which appears to have been raised to /u/ rather than lowered to /o/, as happened in all other syllables. However, it is possible that in reality, final /u/ comes from long *- < -um, where original final -m caused vowel lengthening as well as nasalization. Evidence of this comes from Rhaeto-Romance, in particular Sursilvan, which preserves reflexes of both final -us and -um, and where the latter, but not the former, triggers metaphony. This suggests the development -us > /s/ > /os/, but -um > // > /u/. The original five-vowel system in final unstressed syllables was preserved as-is in some of the more conservative central Italian languages, but in most languages there was further coalescence: In Tuscan (including standard Italian), final /u/ merged into /o/. In the Western Romance languages, final /i/ eventually merged into /e/ (although final /i/ triggered metaphony before that, e.g. Spanish hice, Portuguese fiz "I did" < *fize < Latin fc). Conservative languages like Spanish largely maintain that system, but drop final /e/ after certain single consonants, e.g. /r/, /l/, /n/, /d/, /z/ (< palatalized c). In the Gallo-Romance languages (part of Western Romance), final /o/ and /e/ were dropped entirely unless that produced an impossible final cluster (e.g. /tr/), in which case a "prop vowel" /e/ was added. This left only two final vowels: /a/ and prop vowel /e/. Catalan preserves this system. Loss of final stressless vowels in Venetian shows a pattern intermediate between Central Italian and the Gallo-Italic branch, and the environments for vowel deletion vary considerably depending on the dialect. In table above final /e/ is uniformly absent in mar, absent in some dialects in part(e) /part(e)/ and set(e) /st(e)/, but retained in mare (< Latin mtrem) as a relic of the earlier cluster *dr. In primitive Old French (one of the Gallo-Romance languages), these two remaining vowels merged into //. Various later changes happened in individual languages, e.g. : In French, most final consonants were dropped, and then final // was also dropped. The // is still preserved in spelling as a final silent -e, whose main purpose is to signal that the previous consonant is pronounced, e.g. port "port" /p/ vs. porte "door" /pt/. These changes also eliminated the difference between singular and plural in most words: ports "ports" (still /p/), portes "doors" (still /pt/). Final consonants reappear in liaison contexts (in close connection with a following vowel-initial word), e.g. nous /nu/ "we" vs. nous avons /nuz-av/ "we have", il fait /il f/ "he does" vs. fait-il?" /ft-il/ "does he?". In Portuguese, final unstressed /o/ and /u/ were apparently preserved intact for a while, since final unstressed /u/, but not /o/ or /os/, triggered metaphony (see above). Final-syllable unstressed /o/ was raised in preliterary times to /u/, but always still written o. At some point (perhaps in late Old Portuguese), final-syllable unstressed /e/ was raised to /i/ (but still written e); this remains in Brazilian Portuguese, but has developed to // in European Portuguese. In Catalan, final unstressed /as/ > /es/. In many dialects, unstressed /o/ and /u/ merge into /u/ as in Portuguese, and unstressed /a/ and /e/ merge into //. However, some dialects preserve the original five-vowel system, most notably standard Valencian. The so-called intertonic vowels are word-internal unstressed vowels, i.e. not in the initial, final, or tonic (i.e. stressed) syllable, hence intertonic. Intertonic vowels were the most subject to loss or modification. Already in Vulgar Latin intertonic vowels between a single consonant and a following /r/ or /l/ tended to drop: vtulum "old" > veclum > Dalmatian vieklo, Sicilian vecchiu, Portuguese velho. But many languages ultimately dropped almost all intertonic vowels. Generally, those languages south and east of the La SpeziaRimini Line (Romanian and Central-Southern Italian) maintained intertonic vowels, while those to the north and west (Western Romance) dropped all except /a/. Standard Italian generally maintained intertonic vowels, but typically raised unstressed /e/ > /i/. Examples: septimnam "week" > Italian settimana, Romanian sptmn vs. Spanish/Portuguese semana, French semaine, Occitan/Catalan setmana, Piedmontese sman-a quatturdecim "fourteen" > Italian quattordici, Venetian cuatrdexe, Lombard/Piedmontese quatrdes, vs. Spanish catorce, Portuguese/French quatorze metipsissimus > medipsimus /medssimos/ ~ /medssimos/ "self" > Italian medsimo vs. Venetian medemo, Lombard medemm, Old Spanish mesmo, meesmo (> modern mismo), Old Portuguese meesmo (> modern mesmo), Old French meisme (> later mesme > MF mesme > modern mme) bonittem "goodness" > Italian bonit ~ bont, Romanian buntate but Spanish bondad, Portuguese bondade, French bont collocre "to position, arrange" > Italian coricare vs. Spanish colgar "to hang", Romanian culca "to lie down", French coucher "to lay sth on its side; put s.o. to bed" commnicre "to take communion" > Romanian cumineca vs. Portuguese comungar, Spanish comulgar, Old French comungier carricre "to load (onto a wagon, cart)" > Portuguese/Catalan carregar vs. Spanish/Occitan cargar "to load", French charger, Lombard carg/careg, Venetian carigar/cargar(e) "to load" fbricam "forge" > /*fawra/ > Spanish fragua, Portuguese frgua, Occitan/Catalan farga, French forge disjjnre "to break a fast" > *disjnre > Old French disner "to have lunch" > French dner "to dine" (but *disjnat > Old French desjune "he has lunch" > French (il) djeune "he has lunch") adjtre "to help" > Italian aiutare, Romanian ajuta but French aider, Lombard aid/aiutt (Spanish ayudar, Portuguese ajudar based on stressed forms, e.g. ayuda/ajuda "he helps"; cf. Old French aidier "to help" vs. aiue "he helps") Portuguese is more conservative in maintaining some intertonic vowels other than /a/: e.g. *offerscere "to offer" > Portuguese oferecer vs. Spanish ofrecer, French offrir (< *offerre). French, on the other hand, drops even intertonic /a/ after the stress: Stphanum "Stephen" > Spanish Esteban but Old French Estievne > French tienne. Many cases of /a/ before the stress also ultimately dropped in French: sacramntum "sacrament" > Old French sairement > French serment "oath". The Romance languages for the most part have kept the writing system of Latin, adapting it to their evolution. One exception was Romanian before the nineteenth century, where, after the Roman retreat, literacy was reintroduced through the Romanian Cyrillic alphabet, a Slavic influence. A Cyrillic alphabet was also used for Romanian (Moldovan) in the USSR. The non-Christian populations of Spain also used the scripts of their religions (Arabic and Hebrew) to write Romance languages such as Ladino and Mozarabic in aljamiado. The Romance languages are written with the classical Latin alphabet of 23 letters A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, K, L, M, N, O, P, Q, R, S, T, V, X, Y, Z subsequently modified and augmented in various ways. In particular, the single Latin letter V split into V (consonant) and U (vowel), and the letter I split into I and J. The Latin letter K and the new letter W, which came to be widely used in Germanic languages, are seldom used in most Romance languages mostly for unassimilated foreign names and words. Indeed in Italian prose *kilometro is properly chilometro. Catalan eschews importation of "foreign" letters more than most languages. Thus Wikipedia becomes Viquipdia in Catalan but remains Wikipedia in Spanish. While most of the 23 basic Latin letters have maintained their phonetic value, for some of them it has diverged considerably; and the new letters added since the Middle Ages have been put to different uses in different scripts. Some letters, notably H and Q, have been variously combined in digraphs or trigraphs (see below) to represent phonetic phenomena that could not be recorded with the basic Latin alphabet, or to get around previously established spelling conventions. Most languages added auxiliary marks (diacritics) to some letters, for these and other purposes. The spelling rules of most Romance languages are fairly simple, but subject to considerable regional variation. The letters with most conspicuous phonetic variations, between Romance languages or with respect to Latin, are: B, V: Merged in Spanish and most dialects of Catalan, where both letters are pronounced as either [b] or [] (similar to v) depending on position, with no relationship between sound and spelling. C: Generally a "hard" [k], but "soft" (fricative or affricate) before e, i, or y. G: Generally a "hard" [], but "soft" (fricative or affricate) before e, i, or y. In some languages, like Spanish, the hard g is pronounced as a fricative [] after vowels. In Romansch, the soft g is a voiced palatal plosive [] or a voiced alveolo-palatal affricate [d]. H: Silent in most languages; used to form various digraphs. But represents [h] in Romanian, Walloon and Gascon Occitan. J: Represents a fricative in most languages, or the palatal approximant [j] in Romansh and in several of the languages of Italy. Italian does not use this letter in native words. Usually pronounced like the soft g (except in Romansch and the languages of Italy). Q: As in Latin, its phonetic value is that of a hard c, and in native words it is always followed by a (sometimes silent) u. Romanian does not use this letter in native words. S: Generally voiceless [s], but voiced [z] between vowels in most languages. In Spanish, Romanian, Galician and several varieties of Italian, however, it is always pronounced voiceless. At the end of syllables, it may represent special allophonic pronunciations. In Romansh, it also stands for a voiceless or voiced fricative, [] or [], before certain consonants. W: No Romance language uses this letter in native words, with the exception of Walloon. X: Its pronunciation is rather variable, both between and within languages. In the Middle Ages, the languages of Iberia used this letter to denote the voiceless postalveolar fricative [], which is still the case in Modern Catalan and Portuguese. With the Renaissance the classical pronunciation [ks] or similar consonant clusters, such as [z], [s], or [k] were frequently reintroduced in latinisms and hellenisms. In Venetian it represents [z], and in Ligurian the voiced postalveolar fricative []. Italian does not use this letter in native words. Y: This letter is not used in most languages, with the prominent exceptions of French and Spanish, where it represents [j] before vowels (or various similar fricatives such as the palatal fricative [], in Spanish), and the vowel or semivowel [i] elsewhere. Z: In most languages it represents the sound [z]. However, in Italian it denotes the affricates [dz] and [ts] (which are two separate phonemes, but rarely contrast; among the few examples of minimal pairs are razza "ray" with [ddz], razza "race" with [tts]); in Romansh the voiceless affricate [ts]; and in Galician and Spanish it denotes either the voiceless dental fricative [] or [s]. Otherwise, letters that are not combined as digraphs generally have the same sounds as in the International Phonetic Alphabet (IPA), whose design was, in fact, greatly influenced by the Romance spelling systems. Since most Romance languages have more sounds than can be accommodated in the Roman Latin alphabet they all resort to the use of digraphs and trigraphs combinations of two or three letters with a single sound value. The concept (but not the actual combinations) is derived from Classical Latin, which used, for example, TH, PH, and CH when transliterating the Greek letters "", "" (later ""), and "". These were once aspirated sounds in Greek before changing to corresponding fricatives, and the H represented what sounded to the Romans like an // following /t/, /p/, and /k/ respectively. Some of the digraphs used in modern scripts are: CI: used in Italian, Romance languages in Italy and Romanian to represent /t/ before A, O, or U. CH: used in Italian, Romance languages in Italy, Romanian, Romansh and Sardinian to represent /k/ before E or I; /t/ in Occitan, Spanish, Astur-leonese and Galician; [c] or [t] in Romansh before A, O or U; and // in most other languages. In Catalan it is used in some old spelling conventions for /k/. DD: used in Sicilian and Sardinian to represent the voiced retroflex plosive //. In recent history more accurately transcribed as DDH. DJ: used in Walloon and Catalan for /d/. GI: used in Italian, Romance languages in Italy and Romanian to represent /d/ before A, O, or U, and in Romansh to represent [i] or /di/ or (before A, E, O, and U) [] or /d/ GH: used in Italian, Romance languages in Italy, Romanian, Romansh and Sardinian to represent // before E or I, and in Galician for the voiceless pharyngeal fricative // (not standard sound). GL: used in Romansh before consonants and I and at the end of words for //. GLI: used in Italian and Romansh for //. GN: used in French, Italian, Romance languages in Italy and Romansh for //, as in champignon or gnocchi. GU: used before E or I to represent // or // in all Romance languages except Italian, Romance languages in Italy, Romansh, and Romanian (which use GH instead). IG: used at the end of word in Catalan for /t/, as in maig, safareig or enmig. IX: used between vowels or at the end of word in Catalan for //, as in caixa or calaix. LH: used in Portuguese and Occitan //. LL: used in Spanish, Catalan, Galician, Astur-leonese, Norman and Dgrnsiais, originally for // which has merged in some cases with /j/. Represents /l/ in French unless it follows I (i) when it represents /j/ (or // in some dialects). It is used in Occitan for a long /ll/ LL: used in Catalan for a geminate consonant []. NH: used in Portuguese and Occitan for //, used in official Galician for // . N-: used in Piedmontese and Ligurian for // between two vowels. NN: used in Leonese for //, NY: used in Catalan for //. QU: represents [kw] in Italian, Romance languages in Italy, and Romansh; [k] in French, Astur-leonese (normally before e or i); [k] (before e or i) or [kw] (normally before a or o) in Occitan, Catalan and Portuguese; [k] in Spanish (always before e or i). RR: used between vowels in several languages (Occitan, Catalan, Spanish...) to denote a trilled /r/ or a guttural R, instead of the flap //. SC: used before E or I in Italian and Romance languages in Italy for //, and in French, Portuguese, Catalan and American Spanish as /s/ in words of certain etymology (notice this would be // in standard peninsular Spanish) SCH: used in Romansh for [] or []. SCI: used in Italian and Romance languages in Italy to represent // before A, O, or U. SH: used in Aranese Occitan for //. SS: used in French, Portuguese, Piedmontese, Romansh, Occitan, and Catalan for /s/ between vowels. TS: used in Catalan for /ts/. TG: used in Romansh for [c] or [t]. In Catalan is used for /d/ before E and I, as in metge or fetge. TH: used in Jrriais for //; used in Aranese for either /t/ or /t/. TJ: used between vowels and before A, O or U, in Catalan for /d/, as in sotjar or mitj. TSCH: used in Romansh for [t]. TX: used at the beginning or at the end of word or between vowels in Catalan for /t/, as in txec, esquitx or atxa. TZ: used in Catalan for /dz/. While the digraphs CH, PH, RH and TH were at one time used in many words of Greek origin, most languages have now replaced them with C/QU, F, R and T. Only French has kept these etymological spellings, which now represent /k/ or //, /f/, // and /t/, respectively. = Gemination, in the languages where it occurs, is usually indicated by doubling the consonant, except when it does not contrast phonemically with the corresponding short consonant, in which case gemination is not indicated. In Jrriais, long consonants are marked with an apostrophe: S'S is a long /zz/, SS'S is a long /ss/, and T'T is a long /tt/. Phonemic contrast of geminates vs. single consonants is widespread in Italian, and normally indicated in the traditional orthography: fatto /fatto/ 'done' vs. fato /fato/ 'fate, destiny'; cadde /kadde/ 's/he, it fell' vs. cade /kade/ 's/he, it falls'. The double consonants in French orthography, however, are merely etymological. In Catalan, the gemination of the l is marked by a punt volat = flying point ll. Romance languages also introduced various marks (diacritics) that may be attached to some letters, for various purposes. In some cases, diacritics are used as an alternative to digraphs and trigraphs; namely to represent a larger number of sounds than would be possible with the basic alphabet, or to distinguish between sounds that were previously written the same. Diacritics are also used to mark word stress, to indicate exceptional pronunciation of letters in certain words, and to distinguish words with same pronunciation (homophones). Depending on the language, some letter-diacritic combinations may be considered distinct letters, e.g. for the purposes of lexical sorting. This is the case, for example, of Romanian ([]) and Spanish ([]). The following are the most common use of diacritics in Romance languages. Vowel quality: the system of marking close-mid vowels with an acute accent, , and open-mid vowels with a grave accent, , is widely used (e.g. Catalan, French, Italian). Portuguese, however, uses the circumflex () for the former, and the acute (), for the latter. Some minority Romance languages use an umlaut (diaeresis mark) in the case of , , to indicate fronted vowel variants, as in German. Centralized vowels (//, //) are indicated variously ( in Portuguese, / in Romanian, in Piedmontese, etc.). In French, Occitan and Romanian, these accents are used whenever necessary to distinguish the appropriate vowel quality, but in the other languages, they are used only when it is necessary to mark unpredictable stress, or in some cases to distinguish homophones. Vowel length: French uses a circumflex to indicate what was formerly a long vowel (although nowadays this rather indicates a difference in vowel quality, if it has any effect at all on pronunciation). This same usage is found in some minority languages. Nasality: Portuguese marks nasal vowels with a tilde () when they occur before other written vowels and in some other instances. Palatalization: some historical palatalizations are indicated with the cedilla () in French, Catalan, Occitan and Portuguese. In Spanish and several other world languages influenced by it, the grapheme represents a palatal nasal consonant. Separate pronunciation: when a vowel and another letter that would normally be combined into a digraph with a single sound are exceptionally pronounced apart, this is often indicated with a diaeresis mark on the vowel. This is particularly common in the case of g /gw/ before e or i, because plain gu in this case would be pronounced /g/. This usage occurs in Spanish, French, Catalan and Occitan, and formerly (prior to the 2009 spelling reform) in Brazilian Portuguese. French also uses the diaeresis on the second of two adjacent vowels to indicate that both are pronounced separately, as in Nol "Christmas" and har "to hate". Stress: the stressed vowel in a polysyllabic word may be indicated with an accent, when it cannot be predicted by rule. In Italian, Portuguese and Catalan, the choice of accent (acute, grave or circumflex) may depend on vowel quality. When no quality needs to be indicated, an acute accent is normally used (), but Italian and Romansh use a grave accent (). Portuguese puts a diacritic on all stressed monosyllables that end in a e o as es os, to distinguish them from unstressed function words: ch "tea", ms "bad (fem. pl. )", s "seat (of government)", d "give! (imperative)", ms "month", s "only", ns "we" (cf. mas "but", se "if/oneself", de "of", nos "us"). Homophones: words (especially monosyllables) that are pronounced exactly or nearly the same way and are spelled identically, but have different meanings, can be differentiated by a diacritic. Typically, if one of the pair is stressed and the other isn't, the stressed word gets the diacritic, using the appropriate diacritic for notating stressed syllables (see above). Portuguese does this consistently as part of notating stress in certain monosyllables, whether or not there is an unstressed homophone (see examples above). Spanish also has many pairs of identically pronounced words distinguished by an acute accent on the stressed word: si "if" vs. s "yes", mas "but" vs. ms "more", mi "my" vs. m "me", se "oneself" vs. s "I know", te "you (object)" vs. t "tea", que/quien/cuando/como "that/who/when/how" vs. qu/quin/cundo/cmo "what?/who?/when?/how? ", etc. Catalan has some pairs where both words are stressed, and one is distinguished by a vowel-quality diacritic, e.g. os "bone" vs. s "bear". When no vowel-quality needs distinguishing, French and Catalan use a grave accent (which is otherwise unused in the languages): French ou "or" vs. o "where", French la "the" vs. "l "there", Catalan ma "my" vs. m "hand". Most languages are written with a mixture of two distinct but phonetically identical variants or "cases" of the alphabet: majuscule ("uppercase" or "capital letters"), derived from Roman stone-carved letter shapes, and minuscule ("lowercase"), derived from Carolingian writing and Medieval quill pen handwriting which were later adapted by printers in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries. In particular, all Romance languages presently capitalize (use uppercase for the first letter of) the following words: the first word of each complete sentence, most words in names of people, places, and organizations, and most words in titles of books. The Romance languages do not follow the German practice of capitalizing all nouns including common ones. Unlike English, the names of months, days of the weeks, and derivatives of proper nouns are usually not capitalized: thus, in Italian one capitalizes Francia ("France") and Francesco ("Francis"), but not francese ("French") or francescano ("Franciscan"). However, each language has some exceptions to this general rule. The tables below provide a vocabulary comparison that illustrates a number of examples of sound shifts that have occurred between Latin and Romance languages, along with a selection of minority languages. Words are given in their conventional spellings. In addition, for French the actual pronunciation is given, due to the dramatic differences between spelling and pronunciation. (French spelling approximately reflects the pronunciation of Old French, c. 1200 AD.)