Schools of Buddhism refers to the various institutional and doctrinal divisions of Buddhism that have existed from ancient times up to the present. The classification and nature of various doctrinal, philosophical or cultural facets or schools of Buddhism is vague and has been interpreted in many different ways, often due to the sheer number (perhaps thousands) of different sects, subsects, movements, etc. that have made up or currently make up the whole of Buddhist traditions. The sectarian and conceptual divisions of Buddhist thought are part of the modern framework of Buddhist studies, as well as comparative religion in Asia. From a largely English language standpoint, and to some extent in most of Western academia, Buddhism is separated into two groups at its foundation: Theravda literally, "the Teaching of the Elders" or "the Ancient Teaching," and Mahyna, literally the "Great Vehicle." The most common classification among scholars is threefold, with Mahyna itself split between the traditional Mahyna teachings, and the Vajrayna teachings which emphasize esotericism. The Macmillan Encyclopedia of Religion distinguishes three types of classification of Buddhism, separated into "Movements", "Nikyas" and "Doctrinal schools": Schools: Theravada, basically in South Asia and Southeast Asia. Mahyna, basically in East Asia. Vajrayna, basically in Tibet, Bhutan, Mongolia and the Russian republic of Kalmykia. Nikyas, or monastic fraternities, three of which survive at the present day: Theravda, in Southeast Asia and South Asia Dharmaguptaka, in China, Korea and Vietnam Mlasarvstivda, in the Tibetan tradition Doctrinal schools The terminology for the major divisions of Buddhism can be confusing, as Buddhism is variously divided by scholars and practitioners according to geographic, historical, and philosophical criteria, with different terms often being used in different contexts. The following terms may be encountered in descriptions of the major Buddhist divisions: "Conservative Buddhism" an alternative name for the early Buddhist schools. "Early Buddhist schools" the schools into which Buddhism became divided in its first few centuries; only one of these survives as an independent school, Theravda "East Asian Buddhism" a term used by scholars to cover the Buddhist traditions of Japan, Korea, Singapore and most of China and Vietnam "Eastern Buddhism" an alternative name used by some scholars for East Asian Buddhism; also sometimes used to refer to all traditional forms of Buddhism, as distinct from Western(ized) forms. "Ekayna (one yana) Mahayana texts such as the Lotus Sutra and the Avatamsaka Sutra sought to unite all the different teachings into a single great way. These texts serve as the inspiration for using the term Ekayna in the sense of "one vehicle". This "one vehicle" became a key aspect of the doctrines and practices of Tiantai and Tendai Buddhist sects, which subsequently influenced Chn and Zen doctrines and practices. In Japan, the one-vehicle teaching of the Lotus Sutra also inspired the formation of the Nichiren sect. "Esoteric Buddhism" usually considered synonymous with "Vajrayna". Some scholars have applied the term to certain practices found within the Theravda, particularly in Cambodia. "Hnayna" literally meaning "lesser vehicle." It is considered a controversial term when applied by the Mahyna to mistakenly refer to the Theravda school, and as such is widely viewed as condescending and pejorative. Moreover, Hnayna refers to the now non extant schools with limited set of views, practices and results, prior to the development of the Mahyna traditions. The term is currently most often used as a way of describing a stage on the path in Tibetan Buddhism, but is often mistakenly confused with the contemporary Theravda tradition, which is far more complex, diversified and profound, than the literal and limiting definition attributed to Hnayna . Its use in scholarly publications is now also considered controversial. "Lamaism" an old term, still sometimes used, synonymous with Tibetan Buddhism; widely considered derogatory. "Mahyna" a movement that emerged from early Buddhist schools, together with its later descendants, East Asian and Tibetan Buddhism. Vajrayna traditions are sometimes listed separately. The main use of the term in East Asian and Tibetan traditions is in reference to spiritual levels, regardless of school. "Mainstream Buddhism" a term used by some scholars for the early Buddhist schools. "Mantrayna" usually considered synonymous with "Vajrayna". The Tendai school in Japan has been described as influenced by Mantrayana. "Newar Buddhism" a non-monastic, caste based Buddhism with patrilineal descent and Sanskrit texts. "Nikya Buddhism" or "schools" an alternative term for the early Buddhist schools. "Non-Mahyna" an alternative term for the early Buddhist schools. "Northern Buddhism" an alternative term used by some scholars for Tibetan Buddhism. Also, an older term still sometimes used to encompass both East Asian and Tibetan traditions. It has even been used to refer to East Asian Buddhism alone, without Tibetan Buddhism. "Secret Mantra" an alternative rendering of Mantrayna, a more literal translation of the term used by schools in Tibetan Buddhism when referring to themselves. "Sectarian Buddhism" an alternative name for the early Buddhist schools. "Southeast Asian Buddhism" an alternative name used by some scholars for Theravda. "Southern Buddhism" an alternative name used by some scholars for Theravda. "ravakayna" an alternative term sometimes used for the early Buddhist schools. "Tantrayna" or "Tantric Buddhism" usually considered synonymous with "Vajrayna". However, one scholar describes the tantra divisions of some editions of the Tibetan scriptures as including ravakayna, Mahyna and Vajrayna texts (see Buddhist texts). Some scholars, particularly Franois Bizot, have used the term "Tantric Theravada" to refer to certain practices found particularly in Cambodia. "Theravda" the Buddhism of Sri Lanka, Bangladesh, Burma, Thailand, Laos, Cambodia and parts of Vietnam, China, India, and Malaysia. It is the only surviving representative of the historical early Buddhist schools. The term "Theravda" is also sometimes used to refer to all the early Buddhist schools. "Tibetan Buddhism" usually understood as including the Buddhism of Tibet, Mongolia, Bhutan and parts of China, India and Russia, which follow the Tibetan tradition. "Vajrayna" a movement that developed out of Indian Mahyna, together with its later descendants. There is some disagreement on exactly which traditions fall into this category. Tibetan Buddhism is universally recognized as falling under this heading; many also include the Japanese Shingon school. Some scholars, also apply the term to the Korean milgyo tradition, which is not a separate school. One scholar says, "Despite the efforts of generations of Buddhist thinkers, it remains exceedingly difficult to identify precisely what it is that sets the Vajrayana apart." Sthaviravda Pudgalavda ('Personalist') (c. 280 BCE) Sarvstivda Vibhajyavda (prior to 240 BCE; during Aoka) Theravda (c. 240 BCE) Theravda subschools (see below) Mahsaka (after 232 BCE) Dharmaguptaka (after 232 BCE) Kyapya (after 232 BCE) Vatsputrya (under Aoka) later name: Samitya Dharmottarya Bhadraynya Sanngarika Mlasarvstivda (third and fourth centuries) Sautrntika (between 50 BCE and c. 100 CE) Mahsghika ('Majority', c. 380 BCE) Ekavyahrikas (under Aoka) Lokottaravda Golulika (during Aoka) Bahurutya (late third century BCE) Prajaptivda (late third century BCE) Cetiyavda Caitika (mid-first century BCE) Apara aila Uttara aila The following lists the twenty sects described as Hnayna, as the classification is understood in some Mahyna texts: Sthaviravda split into the 11 sects: Sarvstivdin Haimavata Vatsputrya Dharmottara Bhadraynya Sammitiya Channagirika Mahsaka Dharmaguptaka Kyapya Sautrntika Sthaviravda Haimavata Sarvstivdin Vatsputrya Dharmottara Bhadraynya Sammitiya Channagirika Mahsaka Dharmaguptaka Kyapya Sautrntika Mahsghika split into 9 sects: Ekavyahrika Lokottaravdin Kaukkutika Bahurutya Prajaptivda Caitika Aparaaila Uttaraaila. Mahasanghika Ekavyahrika Caitika Lokottaravdin Aparaaila Kaukkutika Uttaraaila Bahurutya Prajaptivda The following later schools used the vinaya of the Dharmaguptaka: Chinese Buddhism, especially the Vinaya School Korean Buddhism, especially Gyeyul Vietnamese Buddhism Japanese Ritsu The following involve philosophical influence: The Japanese Jojitsu is considered by some an offshoot of Sautrntika; others consider it to be derived from Bahurutya The Chinese/Japanese Kusha school is considered an offshoot of Sarvstivda, influenced by Vasubandhu. The different schools in Theravda often emphasize different aspects (or parts) of the Pli canon and the later commentaries, or differ in the focus on and recommended way of practice. There are also significant differences in strictness or interpretation of the vinaya. Bangladesh: Sangharaj Nikaya Mahasthabir Nikaya Burma: Thudhamma Nikaya Vipassan tradition of Mahasi Sayadaw and disciples Shwegyin Nikaya Dvaya Nikaya or Dvara Nikaya (see Mendelson, Sangha and State in Burma, Cornell University Press, Ithaca, New York, 1975) Hngettwin Nikaya Sri Lanka: Siam Nikaya Waturawila (or Mahavihara Vamshika Shyamopali Vanavasa Nikaya) Amarapura Nikaya Kanduboda (or Swejin Nikaya) Tapovana (or Kalyanavamsa) Ramaa Nikaya Sri Kalyani Yogasrama Samstha (or Galduwa Tradition) Delduwa forest nikaya Thailand Maha Nikaya Dhammakaya Movement Mahasati meditation (mindfulness meditation) Thammayut Nikaya Thai Forest Tradition Tradition of Ajahn Chah Vipassana movement Indian Buddhism Mdhyamaka Prsangika Svtantrika Yogcra Chinese Buddhism Vinaya school Jingtu (Pure Land) Satyasiddhi (Historical) Abhidharmakoa (Historical) Daabhmik (absorbed into Huayan) Tiantai Huayan (Avatasaka) Chan (Zen) Tangmi (Esoteric) Sanlun (Mdhyamaka) Weishi (Yogcra) Korean Buddhism Tongbulgyo (Interpenetrated Buddhism - including Jeongto, or Pure Land) Gyeyul (Vinaya school) Cheontae (Tiantai) Hwaeom (Avatasaka) Seon (Zen) Jingak (Esoteric) Samnon (Mdhyamaka) Beopsang (Yogcra) Yeolban (Nirvana school) Wonbulgyo (Korean Reformed Buddhism) Vietnamese Buddhism Tnh (Pure Land) Thin (Zen) Trc Lm (Syncretic) Unified Buddhist Church (Engaged Buddhism) Ha Ho (Reformist) Japanese Buddhism Pure Land Jdo-sh Jdo Shinsh Ji-sh Yz-nembutsu-sh Rissh school (Vinaya school) Jojitsu (Satyasiddhi - historical) Kusha (Abhidharmakoa - historical) Sanron (Mdhyamaka - historical) Hoss (Yogcra) Kegon (Avatamsaka) Japanese esoteric Buddhism Tendai (Tiantai) Shingon Shinnyo-en Shugendo (Syncretic) Zen Rinzai St baku Fuke-sh (Historical) Nichiren Buddhism Nichiren Sh Honmon Butsury-sh Kempon Hokke Nichiren Shsh Subcategorised according to predecessors Tibetan Buddhism Nyingma New Bn (synthesis of Yungdrung Bn and Nyingmapa) Kadam (Historical) Gelug New Kadampa Tradition Sakya Ngor-pa Tsar-pa Jonang Kagyu: Shangpa Kagyu Marpa Kagyu: Rechung Kagyu Dagpo Kagyu: Karma Kagyu (or Kamtshang Kagyu) Tsalpa Kagyu Baram Kagyu Pagtru Kagyu (or Phagmo Drugpa Kagyu): Taklung Kagyu Trophu Kagyu Drukpa Kagyu Martsang Kagyu Yerpa Kagyu Yazang Kagyu Shugseb Kagyu Drikung Kagyu Rime movement (ecumenical movement) Newar Buddhism Tangmi Buddhism Japanese Mikkyo Shingon Tendai (derived from Tiantai but added tantric practices) Shinnyo-en Shugendo (Syncretized with Shinto, Taoism, and shamanism) Dalit Buddhist movement Dhammakaya Movement Diamond Way Engaged Buddhism Kenshkai New Kadampa Tradition Nipponzan Myhji Reiykai Rissh Ksei Kai Shambhala Buddhism Share International Shshinkai Ska Gakkai Triratna Buddhist Community True Buddha School Vipassana movement Won Buddhism 