In mathematics, particularly in linear algebra, the Schur product theorem states that the Hadamard product of two positive definite matrices is also a positive definite matrix. The result is named after Issai Schur (Schur 1911, p. 14, Theorem VII) (note that Schur signed as J. Schur in Journal fr die reine und angewandte Mathematik.) It is easy to show that for matrices and , the Hadamard product considered as a bilinear form acts on vectors as where is the matrix trace and is the diagonal matrix having as diagonal entries the elements of . Since and are positive definite, we can consider their square-roots and and write Then, for , this is written as for and thus is positive. This shows that is a positive definite matrix. = Let be an -dimensional centered Gaussian random variable with covariance . Then the covariance matrix of and is Using Wick's theorem to develop we have Since a covariance matrix is positive definite, this proves that the matrix with elements is a positive definite matrix. = Let and be -dimensional centered Gaussian random variables with covariances , and independent from each other so that we have for any Then the covariance matrix of and is Using Wick's theorem to develop and also using the independence of and , we have Since a covariance matrix is positive definite, this proves that the matrix with elements is a positive definite matrix. = Let and . Then Each is positive semidefinite (but, except in the 1-dimensional case, not positive definite, since they are rank 1 matrices). Also, thus the sum is also positive semidefinite. = To show that the result is positive definite requires further proof. We shall show that for any vector , we have . Continuing as above, each , so it remains to show that there exist and for which the inequality is strict. For this we observe that Since is positive definite, there is a for which is not 0 for all , and then, since is positive definite, there is an for which is not 0 for all . Then for this and we have . This completes the proof. 