A Sinophile (from sino- meaning "Chinese" [originating through Persian and Sanskrit from Late Latin Sin] and -philos meaning "loving" [from Greek ]) is a person who demonstrates a strong interest and love for Chinese culture or its people. It is also commonly used to describe those knowledgeable of Chinese history and culture (such as scholars and students), non-native Chinese language speakers, pro-Chinese politicians, and people perceived as having a strong interest in any of the above. Chinese cuisine Chinese Architecture varieties of Chinese (typically Mandarin or Cantonese) Chinese calligraphy and artwork Chinese astrology or horoscopes Ancient art of feng shui Daoism Chan Buddhism Chinese philosophy Confucianism Martial arts, such as variants of Kung fu Politics of China, the Communist Party of China, socialism with Chinese characteristics, Maoism, Dengism, one country, two systems, the Mass Line, politics of Taiwan Traditional cultural Han Chinese clothing Hanfu and Manchu-influenced Chinese clothing Qipao Chinese tea culture Chinese wine culture and baijiu The Chinese arts, encompassing Chinese poetry, Chinese literature, Chinese music, and Chinese cinema as well as Chinese traditional forms of theatrical entertainment such as crosstalk and operas Enver Hoxha, leader of the communist Albanian Party of Labor who considered the People's Republic of China to be Albania's primary ally. Kevin Rudd, the 26th Prime Minister of Australia (2007 2010, 2013) who majored in Chinese language and history. Colin Mackerras, Australian sinologist and experts in the fields of Peking opera and Chinese national minorities Edwin Maher, a New Zealand-born Australian journalist who is notably begins and signs off anchoring on CCTV-9 with Ni Hao and Zai Jian, respectively. He has caught unfair criticism from the West for being an anchor with Chinese Central Television, despite an arguable imperialist bias being present in Western media. Pepe Escobar, a roving correspondent for the Asia Times, who covers US foreign policy, Latin American, Middle Eastern, Asian, and especially Chinese affairs, extensively Paulo Freire, a Brazilian Marxist educator and philosopher who praised progressive aspects in Chinese education during the Cultural Revolution. Morris Cohen was a Jewish-Canadian soldier and adventurer who became aide-de-camp to the Chinese leader Sun Yat-sen. Mark Roswell () Ottawa native currently a CCTV personality and celebrity in China. Dr. Norman Bethune A famous medic. Rafael Correa, Ecuadorian President and economist whose foreign policies include socioeconomic cooperation with the People's Republic of China with regards to finance and industry, trade and resource development of both oil and hydroelectricity, and infrastructure. Gottfried Leibniz, German polymath who was fascinated with Confucius and I Ching. John Rabe, German Nazi party member who saved thousands of Chinese civilians during the Second Sino-Japanese war. Max Bauer, a military adviser and commander within Chiang Kai-Shek's Kuomintang administration. He is buried in China. Alexander von Falkenhausen, another military adviser and personal friend to Chiang Kai-Shek. Martin Heidegger, attempted to translate the Dao De Jing with Paul Hsiao, may have been more deeply influenced by Daoist thought Des Bishop, an Irish-American comedian who spent a year in China learning Chinese and performing comedy in both Chinese and English. Marco Polo (), Venetian merchant and traveler; wrote about his travels in Yuan China and became an imperial official. Matteo Ricci ( or ), Jesuit priest who spent decades in the imperial court of the Ming. Muammar Gaddafi, a Libyan revolutionary and politician who emulated some key aspects of Chairman Mao Zedong, as well as borrowing some of his ideology, such as that of Three Worlds Theory. Under his rule, Libya continued to have positive relations with China up to 2011 which marked the end of the Great Socialist People's Libyan Arab Jamahiriya. Johan Galtung, a mathematician, sociologist, and the founder of the discipline of peace and conflict studies, who praised Chinese rewriting of concepts of an "open society" and "democracy" as well as China's flexibility with diplomacy. Leo Tolstoy, Russian writer widely considered one of the world's greatest novelists. Dmitri Mendeleev, Russian chemist and inventor. Johan Gunnar Andersson, sinologist. Bernhard Karlgren, sinologist. Liam Bates, performer, television host and adventurer. Aurora Carlson Ben Hedges Daniel Newham Eric Liddell, a Scottish rugby player, Olympic track and field athlete, and missionary Joseph Needham (), a British biochemist best known for his works on the history of Chinese science Derek Bryan Reginald Johnston Herbert Giles David Wilson, Baron Wilson of Tillyorn (/), British diplomat and former Governor of Hong Kong Robert Morrison (/), Scottish missionary Sir Cecil Clementi (), British colonial administrator and former Governor of Hong Kong Sir John Francis Davis (/), Sinologist, diplomat and former Governor of Hong Kong Sir Edward Youde (), diplomat, Sinologist and former Governor of Hong Kong Sir David Akers-Jones (), former administrator of Hong Kong and advisor to the Chinese government Pearl S. Buck ( or ), American writer and novelist. Andrew Zimmern, an American television personality, chef, and adventure traveler Ai Hua, an American television personality and a frequent guest on programs on China Central Television. Anna Louise Strong, an American journalist and peace activist who lived in China Theodore H. White, a political journalist who was a war reporter in China. Owen Lattimore, an American author, educator, and scholar who served as an adviser, but later a critic, of Chiang Kai-shek, and a proponent to what some consider a precursor of China's cultural and legislative autonomy policies with autonomous regions in the People's Republic of China. John S. Service, an American diplomat and "China Hand" who was born in Chengdu. He was persecuted by McCarthyism due to his pro-China views that also included sympathies with Chinese socialism. John Paton Davies, Jr., one of the major proponents and facilitators of the Dixie Mission, a program that was formed to establish an anti-fascist alliance between the People's Liberation Army and the United States. David D. Barrett, a military officer and commander of the Dixie Mission who received a comparatively lenient form of treatment for being a "China Hand." Anson Burlingame, American lawyer, legislator and diplomat who was appointed in 1861 to be the United States minister in China. Edgar Snow, an American journalist who was among the first Westerners to interview Mao Zedong and report on the Long March Jerome A. Cohen, a professor of law at New York University School of Law, expert in Chinese law and advisor to Republic of China President Ma Ying-jiu. Mark Zuckerberg, the C.E.O. of Facebook who is an avid Chinese learner R.L. Kuhn, an American corporate strategist, investment banker, and intellectual who is a notably situated in the pro-China segment of the intellectual community. He closely knows many Chinese political leaders. Homer Lea, was military advisory and general in the army of Sun Yat-sen during Boxer Rebellion Cordwainer Smith, Godson of Sun Yat-sen. Chloe Bennet, actress and singer Paul Robeson, an American baritone singer, actor of film and stage, peace and civil rights activist, and All-American football athlete who temporarily resided in China, was fluent in Chinese, and compared the struggle of the Chinese to Black people in the United States. Quentin Tarantino, American director, fan of martial arts films, and the Shaw Brothers films in particular Wallace Stevens, one of the most influential poets of the 20th century. Wu-Tang Clan, a rap group from New York. There are many Chinese cultural themes within their songs. Huey Newton, an African-American social activist who was deeply influenced by Maoism and described his time in China as a "psychological liberation" praising Chinese contemporary society throughout his works. Ezra Pound, an American poet who integrated many aspects of Chinese poetry into his writing, and especially advocated for Confucianism. 