Sringeri Sharada Peetha is the southern Advaita Vedanta matha or monastery established by Adi Shankara in 8th century AD. The matha is on the banks of the Tunga River in Chikkamagalur district, Karnataka, India, 105 kilometers from Mangaluru and 303 kilometers from the state capital Bengaluru. The majority of members of Smartha community follow the Advaita Vedanta philosophy of Adi Shankara. Smarta and Advaita have become almost synonymous, though not all Advaitins are Smartas. Traditionally, Shankara (8th century) is regarded as the greatest teacher and reformer of the Smartha. According to Hiltebeitel, Shankara established the nondualist interpretation of the Upanishads as the touchstone of a revived smarta tradition. The Sringeri Sharada monastery founded by Shankara in Karnataka is still the centre of the Smarta sect. See also: Jagadguru of Sringeri Sharada Peetham for the full list of Jagadgurus The head of the matha or Guru Parampara ('teacher tradition', referring to monastic initiation) is venerated as Jagadguru. The head has so far been chosen by the prevailing pontiff usually from among his disciples usually chosen as a Brahmachari, educated in the Vedas and other required learning. Succession to the ankracharya title is through disciple selection by the existing ankracharya. The successor to the matha is usually named at a young age, from among the Vedic Brahmana community. The Sringeri matha records its tradition from the 8th century onwards. The history of the Sringeri matha since the period of Sri Bharathi Tirtha (I) and Sri Vidyaranya (14th century) onwards has been documented. Most of the names from the Sringeri lineage up to Vidyaranya are also found in the Sri Guru Charitra, a 15th-century Marathi work by Gangadhara Saraswathi. Sureshwaracharya, who was Maana Mira in his purvashrama, was installed here as the successor of Shankaracharya before the latter resumed his tour to found his three pithas at Puri, Dwaraka and Badrinath. The present head of the math is Bharati Tirtha Swaminah. The below table is about the last four Jagadgurus, including the incumbent Sri Bharati Tirtha Swaminah. 