SS Brigade Schuldt was a formation of the Waffen SS during World War II. It was named after its commander Brigadefhrer Hinrich Schuldt. It served on the Eastern Front and was composed of units drawn from the Leibstandarte SS Adolf Hitler, Das Reich, Polizei Divisions and a detachment from the Luftwaffe. The brigade was formed in November 1942, from the VII. (Wach) Battalion LSSAH a unit normally stationed in Berlin on Guard and Public Duties, The I. Battalion SS Panzergrenadier Regiment 3, Der Fhrer from the Das Reich, the I. Battalion SS Polizei Panzergrenadier Regiment 7, from the SS Polizei and the Luftwaffe Field Battalion 100 Hermann Gring. After formation the Brigade was moved to the Eastern Front in December 1942, and by 16 December was sent to the Stalingrad front line between Millerovo and Meshkov in the Southern end of the Eastern Front. On 5 December the I Battalion SS Polizei Panzergrenader Regiment 7 was loaded on trains and was disembarked to occupy defensive positions to the West of the Don river which was being held by the Italian 8th Army. When the Red Army attacked the Italians retreated without a fight. Parts of the I. Battalion SS-Polizei became separated from the main body (1st and 4th companies). But they still managed to critically delay the Russian advance to the Donets River, which enabled the 1st Panzer Army and the 4th Panzer Army to retreat through Rostov. On 1 January 1943, it was placed under command of the 6th Panzer Division and on 13 December after taking part in the defence of Oveschkin, it was surrounded by the Red Army and was forced to breakout and retreat to the new German liines. The final Battalion of the Brigade arrived on 23 January when the I. Battalion Der Fhrer reached the Brigade positions, and the next day the Brigade launched its first counterattack towards Slavyanoserbsk. Because of its battle spirit, firepower and speed, this battalion soon made its reputation with the Russians. "The Russians were scared of them as hell." The attack failed and the Brigade returned to a defensive posture on the 29 January. The battalion had proved its worth during the fighting around Voroshilov in early February to 7 March. The reinforced I.Btn Der Fhrer received orders to rejoin its division; the battalion was reorganized into two rifle companies and one heavy company. The Brigade was pulled out of the line to reform on 14 February at Krassnoskij and was assigned to the 15th Panzergrenadier Division on 15 January. To overcome some of the Brigades losses it was reinforced on 25 February by a Battalion from the 62nd Infantry Division. The Brigade was formally disbanded on 1 March 1943, with what was left of its units returning to their parent formations. The I./SS-Polizei Panzegrenadier Regiment 7 was left with 84 men from original 527 and the VII.Battalion LSSAH had 38 men left from original 800. On the 1 April the Brigade commander Hinrich Schuldt was awarded the Oak Leaves. to the Knight's Cross of the Iron Cross and the German Cross in Gold for the Brigades performance. VII/. (Wach) Battalion, Leibstandarte SS Adolf Hitler. 3 Schtzen Companies 1 Heavy Company I/.Battalion, SS Panzergrenadier Regiment 3 Der Fhrer. 1 Schtzen Company 1 Heavy Company (4 x 7.5 cm PaK 40, 2 x Flammenwerfer) 1 Panzer Company (8 x Panzer IV, 13 x Panzer III) I/.Battalion SS Polizei Panzergrenadier Regiment 7 3 Schtzen Companies 1 Heavy Company Luftwaffe Field Battalion 100 Hermann Gring. 3 Schtzen Companies 1 Anti tank Company (12 x 7.5 cm PaK 40) 