The Star Wars Roleplaying Game is a tabletop role-playing game set in the Star Wars universe, written and published for the first time by Fantasy Flight Games (FFG) as of August 2012. It is constituted by three different standalone games, each one conceived to play a particular type of character: Star Wars: Edge of the Empire (for playing smugglers, bounty hunters, pirates etc.) Star Wars: Age of Rebellion (for playing rebel soldiers and freedom fighters against the evil Galactic Empire) Star Wars: Force and Destiny (for playing the last Jedi Knights under the Empire's rule) In the 2000s, Wizards of the Coast owned the license for all Star Wars' collectible card and role-playing games. When the license expired in May 2010, the company declined to renew it. In August 2011 Fantasy Flight Games acquired the Star Wars license from Lucasfilm Ltd. and announced two Star Wars gaming products: the miniatures game X-Wing and the card game Star Wars: The Card Game. A role-playing game was rumoured to be in the works but only a whole year later, in August 2012, the editor announced the publication of Star Wars: Edge of the Empire, the first standalone game of a whole of three, constituting the Fantasy Flight Games Star Wars role-playing game. On this occasion the first installment of the 'trilogy' was first sold in a beta version (Star Wars: Edge of the Empire Beta). The completed version of Edge of the Empire, nearly double the size of the beta, was released on June 25, 2013. Age of Rebellion's beta version was released in October 2013, its beginner game sales started on April 25, 2014, and the final version of the game, the Age of Rebellion core rulebook, finally started to be sold on July 3, 2014. Among the third installment line of products, Star Wars: Force and Destiny, conceived for playing Jedi characters, the beta version saw light of day on September 2014. Fantasy Flight initially drew criticism for releasing a beta version, making people pay twice, and for the extra expense of the unusual custom dice. But reviews after launch were enthusiastic about the dice, with Game Informer saying "In practice, this system offers tremendous flexibility to allow the players to participate in the storytelling process, rather than just waiting for the GM to respond after a die roll. The players talk together about how to interpret a roll of the dice, and shape the results to make the most exciting story. It also speaks strongly to the cinematic nature of the Star Wars universe; characters in the movies often succeed or fail along with potent side effects." and Penny Arcade saying "This dice system is designed to facilitate awesome story telling and it worked great!" Releases' timeline (at least in the United States. Supplements are not included in the timeline): August 2012: Star Wars: Edge of the Empire beta version is released. It is a paperback glued booklet including stickers for use on conventional polyhedral dice. December 2012: Star Wars: Edge of the Empire beginner game is released. It is a boxed set including two glued paperback books, some staplebound booklets and, for the first time, the first mass-produced official dice of the game. January 2013: The official dice sets from the game start to be sold worldwide (with the mention Star Wars Edge of the Empire Roleplay Dice displayed on the packaging). June 2013: Star Wars: Edge of the Empire core rulebook (a hardcover book) is released. September 2013: Star Wars: Age of Rebellion beta version (a paperback glued booklet) is released. April 2014: Star Wars: Age of Rebellion beginner game (a boxed set) is released. July 2014: Star Wars: Age of Rebellion core rulebook (a hardcover book) is released. July 2014: The official dice sets from the game are re-released, this time with no particular mention to any of the standalone games of the series, the packaging simply showing the label Star Wars Roleplaying Dice. September 2014: Star Wars: Force and Destiny beta version (a paperback glued booklet) is released. June 2015: Star Wars: Force and Destiny beginner game (a boxed set) is released. All three installments of the Star Wars Roleplaying Game are set within the time period of the Star Wars original trilogy, with Star Wars: Edge of the Empire being set shortly after the explosion of the Death Star and dealing with characters on the fringes of galactic space, Star Wars: Age of Rebellion being set at around the time of The Empire Strikes Back and allowing the Players to join the Rebellion, and Star Wars: Force and Destiny also being set shortly after the explosion of the first Death Star and the death of Obi-Wan Kenobi when the force sensitive and Jedi slowly start to reemerge in hope of rebuilding the Order of the Jedi. Characters are created within the setting by first specifying their species, then specifying their initial profession. They then can spend experience points increasing attributes or skills, or gaining abilities from their profession. As in some other career based RPGs your current career indicates what you do and what skills you can learn easily - but you can open other careers and use abilities from them while not closing the first ones. Abilities from a given career cost more experience points the deeper into the career you go, thus encouraging people to take multiple careers. The game's rules assume that all characters have all the listed skills at "zero level" if they do not have a level in it. The character's default Skill level is equal to the skill's governing Attribute score. The Attributes are rated from a minimum of 1 to a maximum of 6. Skills have a maximum of 5. The Attributes are the usual RPG fare: Brawn (Strength), Agility (Dexterity), Intellect (Intelligence), Cunning (Wisdom), Willpower (Mental Focus), and Presence (Charisma). The player begins character design by selecting a Racial Template. Each Race has different racial Attribute minimums and maximums. Sometimes they also have a free level in a Racial Skill or have a Racial Talent. As an example, Baseline Humans have a Racial Template that has a score of 2 in all Attributes and can have any two different Skills of the player's choice at the start of play. Characters can also pay points to increase Starting Wealth or Racial Advantages. The player then picks a Career - which grants Career Skills, then a Specialization - which grants more Career Skills and a Specialization Tree (which grants Specialization-based Talents). Characters cannot buy a new Career but may buy additional Specializations. An example is the Engineer Career, which narrows to the Mechanic, Saboteur, and Scientist Specializations. If a character wishes to buy another Specialization, it costs less for one under their Career than for one under another Career. For instance, an Engineer - Mechanic who wants to add the Engineer's Scientist Specialization would pay less than if they wanted to add the Technician's Slicer or Ace's Pilot Specialization. Career Skills grant the first level free during initial character creation (but cost points later on if a newly purchased Career Specialization grants them). They also cost less than regular Skills when buying additional levels in them. The character's Career grants 4 Career Skills from the Career template skill list and their Career Specialization grants 2 more Career Skills from the Specialization template skill list. For instance, an Engineer-Mechanic and Technician-Mechanic have the same Specialization Tree but have different Specialization template Career Skills to choose from to depict their different character concepts. Talents are what gamers call "crunchy bits": advantages with cool names (like Gear Head or Hold Together, Baby) that add flavor to a character and either grant bonuses, benefit allies, remove penalties during play, or penalize adversaries. They cost character points to buy and must be unlocked in the order they appear on a diagram called a "Specialization Tree" (in video games such as 'Star Wars: The Old Republic). The further down the diagram, the more expensive (and powerful) the Talents are. The player has to follow the Tree's branches to unlock them. This means sometimes that the player has to buy Talents they do not really want to get to the desired Talents further down the same branch. However, it avoids having the character cherry-pick the more powerful Talents and leaving the rest. Disadvantages can be taken during character creation to offset point costs. Edge of Empire has Obligations, something the character is forced or compelled to do. Age of Rebellion has Duties, something the character wants to do. The number of Player Characters in the group set the base Disadvantage number because the Game Master rolls at the beginning of play to see which character's Disadvantage will be used during the session. The character can pay off the disadvantage with experience points in later gameplay. Force and Destiny has Morality, which governs how close to slipping over to the Dark Side the Force using character is. Unlike the other two games Morality is governed by a characters actions during gameplay, with Conflict being generated whenever they choose to perform a morally questionable action or choose to use the Dark Side of the Force in order to power their abilities. Morality cannot be 'bought' with XP, instead a player wanting to change their alignment must actually role play a more aggressive character to turn Dark, or perform acts of compassion to become a paragon of the Light. Motivation is the character's guiding principle (a Belief, Personal Connection, or Quest). If the player uses the character's Motivation during gameplay, they get an experience point bonus. As in Fantasy Flight Games' edition of Warhammer Fantasy Roleplay the system requires custom polyhedral dice, or dice modified with stickers to play (the beta version came with stickers to convert ordinary dice of the right size to Star Wars dice). The custom dice enable the dice having results on two axes; how successful the skill check was, and how lucky the attempt was with other factors and normally only one success on the pass / fail axis is needed to succeed. There are both positive and negative types of dice, and these can be added to represent advantages or extra difficulty in the skill check. White Die (The Force Die) (12-sided white die with one or two black or white dots per facet) are used to calculate the number of Force Tokens granted at the beginning of the scenario. The Player Characters' party gets some of one color and the game master gets the tokens of the opposing color. White Tokens (The Light Side) are for the Good Guys and Black Tokens (The Dark Side) are for the Bad Guys; the party's affiliation determines which color they get. Every time a token is used by the party or the game master, it is flipped over to change its color and awards either a bonus die (Green or Yellow) for a character's action or a penalty die (Purple or Red) for the opposition. The tokens can also be used to change the situation ("I'm drawing my pistol..." "Did you remember to retrieve your pistol when you fell down that hillside last scene?") or cancel out or re-roll an unfavorable result - like a fatal hit or pivotal skill-check failure. Green Dice (Ability Die) (8-sided green dice with black markings) are based on the character's Attribute level. They only have Success, Advantage, and blank facets. Purple Dice (Difficulty Die) (8-sided purple dice with white markings) are based on the Difficulty of the skill roll. They only have Failure, Threat, and blank facets. Yellow Dice (Proficiency Die) (12-sided yellow dice with black markings) indicate the character's level in a skill. Each level in a skill substitutes a Yellow Die for a Green Die in a skill roll. The Yellow Dice are like the green Ability Dice, except they have a Triumph (critical success) result symbol on one of its facets. Red Dice (Challenge Die) (12-sided red dice with white markings) are used with an opposing skill level or extreme difficulty. Red Dice are like the purple Difficulty Dice except they have a Despair (critical failure) result symbol on one of its facets. Blue Dice (Boost Die) (6-sided light-blue dice with black markings) are used to aid a skill roll due to advantageous factors. They only have Success, Advantage, and blank facets. Player Characters with equal or greater skill can take an action to aid another Player Character who is using a skill to perform a task by granting them a Blue Die. Black Dice (Setback Die) (6-sided black dice with white markings) are used to penalize a skill roll due to disadvantageous factors. They only have Failure, Threat, and blank facets. The results on the dice are Success (explosion symbol) / Failure (caltrop symbol), Advantage (a pip in a wreath) / Threat (a pip on the central facet of a faceted sphere), or Critical Success (starburst in a circle) / Critical Failure (triangle in a circle). Blank facets confer no benefit or penalty. The result depends on subtracting the lower result from the higher result on an axis. A result of 4 Successes and 3 Failures is a Success of 1. A result of 2 Advantages and 5 Threats is a Threat of 3. A result of no Critical Successes and 1 Critical Failure is 1 Critical Failure. These results mean that the character made the Skill roll with a bonus of 1 Success, but suffered 3 Threats and a Critical Failure as well. The Game Master would interpret the result to indicate what problems and difficulties would happen next. For example, a Rebel commando bumps into a squad of Stormtroopers turning around a corner and he shoots his blaster at them. His blaster shot would have hit (1 Success), but he would only do base damage because he did not roll any Advantages. The Game Master interprets the negative results to mean that the commando suffers 1 point of Strain (1 Threat), suffers 1 Black Die on the next skill roll (2 Threats), and the power cell in his blaster ran out and needs to be reloaded (1 Critical Failure). Bounty Hunter: Assassin, Gadgeteer, Survivalist Colonist: Doctor, Politico, Scholar, Entrepreneur, Marshal, Performer Explorer: Fringer, Scout, Trader, Archaeologist, Big-Game Hunter, Driver Hired Gun: Bodyguard, Marauder, Mercenary Soldier, Demolitionist, Enforcer, Heavy Smuggler: Pilot, Scoundrel, Thief, Charmer, Gambler, Gunslinger Technician: Mechanic, Outlaw Tech, Slicer Universal: Force Sensitive Exile Ace: Driver, Gunner, Pilot, Beast Rider, Hotshot, Rigger Commander: Commodore, Squadron Leader, Tactician Diplomat: Agitator, Ambassador, Quartermaster, Advocate, Analyst, Propagandist Engineer: Mechanic, Saboteur, Scientist Soldier: Commando, Medic, Sharpshooter Spy: Scout, Slicer, Infiltrator Universal: Force Sensitive Emergent, Recruit Consular: Healer, Niman Disciple, Sage Guardian: Peacekeeper, Protector, Soresu Defender, Warleader, Armorer, Warden Mystic: Advisor, Makashi Duelist, Seer Seeker: Ataru Striker, Hunter, Pathfinder Sentinel: Artisan, Shadow, Shien Expert Warrior: Aggressor, Shii-Cho Knight, Starfighter Ace Rulebooks / basic sets Star Wars: Edge of the Empire - Beta Star Wars: Edge of the Empire - Beginner Game Star Wars: Edge of the Empire - Core Rulebook Accessories Edge of the Empire Game Master's Kit (includes the gamemaster's screen) Adventures Beyond the Rim The Jewel of Yavin Mask of the Pirate Queen Rules Supplements Enter the Unknown (Explorer Career Book) Dangerous Covenants (Hired Gun Career Book) Far Horizons (Colonist Career Book) Fly Casual (Smuggler Career Book) Sourcebooks Suns of Fortune (Corellian Sector Source Book) Lords of Nal Hutta (Hutt Space Source Book) Rulebooks / basic sets Star Wars: Age of Rebellion - Beta Star Wars: Age of Rebellion - Beginner Game Star Wars: Age of Rebellion - Core Rulebook Accessories Age of Rebellion Game Master's Kit (includes the gamemaster's screen) Adventures Onslaught at Arda I Rules Supplements Stay on Target (Ace Career Book) Desperate Allies (Diplomat Career Book) Sourcebooks Strongholds of Resistance (Alliance Worlds Source Book) Rulebooks / basic sets Star Wars: Force and Destiny - Beta Star Wars: Force and Destiny - Beginner Game Star Wars: Force and Destiny - Core Rulebook Accessories Force and Destiny Game Master's Kit (includes the gamemaster's screen) Adventures Chronicles of the Gatekeeper Rules Supplements and Sourcebooks Keeping the Peace (Guardian Career Book) 