Subprefecture is an administrative division of a country that is below prefecture or province. There are twelve Albanian counties or prefectures, each of which is subdivided into several districts, sometimes translated as subprefectures. Examples: District of Kor, District of Sarand In Brazil the subprefectures (Portuguese: subprefeituras) are administrative divisions of some big cities, such as So Paulo and Rio de Janeiro. The head of a subprefecture, the subprefeito, is indicated by the municipality's mayor (in Brazil called prefeito). In So Paulo there are 31 subprefectures. The largest in total area, Parelheiros, covers 353.5 km, and the most populous, Capela do Socorro, has more than 600,000 inhabitants. Examples: Djibasso Subprefecture Examples: N'Gouri Subprefecture, Chari-Baguirmi Prefecture, and Massakory Subprefecture. It was used in Qing Dynasty. Called ting ( or ) in Chinese, it is also on the same level as a department () and a district (). And is below prefecture (). Examples: Aihun Ting in the late-Qing Heilongjiang. A Sous-prfecture is the administrative town of an arrondissement where an arrondissement doesn't contain the prfecture. The civil servant in charge of local executive power is the sous-prfet. Examples: Aix-en-Provence, Apt, Arles, Bayonne, Boulogne-Billancourt, Boulogne-sur-Mer, Calais, Cambrai, Chalon-sur-Sane, Chteau-Thierry, Cherbourg, Le Havre, Narbonne, Reims, Saint-Germain-en-Laye, Saint-Malo, Saint-Omer, Sedan, Vichy. Examples: Examples: A sous-prfecture is an administrative subdivision of a department in Ivory Coast. Examples: Anyama Subprefecture, Bingerville Subprefecture, Brofodoum Subprefecture, Songon Subprefecture Some Japanese prefectures have branch offices called (shich) in Japanese, which are translated in English as "subprefectures", "branch offices", or "branches of the prefectural government". See details in Subprefectures of Japan and an example of Kushiro Subprefecture. Under Qing Dynasty rule, this was translated from tng () in Chinese Tamsui Subprefecture ( dn shu tng) and Kavalan (Ga'malan) Subprefecture ( g m ln tng, of Yilan City) (both in Taiwan). Under Japanese rule, (ch) translated to prefecture, so (shich) translated to subprefecture. 