The Advertiser (commonly known as The Tiser) is a conservative, daily tabloid-format newspaper published in the city of Adelaide, South Australia. First published as a broadsheet named The South Australian Advertiser on 12 July 1858, it is currently printed daily from Monday to Saturday. A Sunday edition exists under the name of the Sunday Mail. The Advertiser is a publication of News Corp Australia. The head office of The Advertiser has relocated from a former premises in King William Street, to a new office complex, known as Keith Murdoch House at 31 Waymouth Street. The South Australian Advertiser and The South Australian Weekly Chronicle were founded in 1858 by the Reverend John Henry Barrow, a former editor of a competing newspaper, the South Australian Register. The South Australian Advertiser was published from 12 July 1858 (Vol 1, no 1) to 22 March 1889 (Vol 31, no 9493). The original owners were Barrow and Charles Henry Goode. The company was re-formed in 1864, with additional shareholders Fred Burden, John Baker, Captain Scott, James Counsell, Thomas Graves and some others. In 1871, when the shareholders were Barrow, Goode, Robert Stuckey, Thomas Graves, William Parkin, Thomas King, James Counsell, and George Williams Chinner, the partnership was dissolved and the business was carried on by Barrow and King. It continued from 1889 as The Advertiser Between 1893 and 1929, Sir John Langdon Bonython was the sole proprietor of The Advertiser. As well as being a talented newspaper editor, he also supported the movement towards the Federation of Australia. The Canberra suburb of Bonython, and the now abolished South Australian electoral division of Bonython, were named in his honour. On Langdon Bonython's retirement, his son Sir John Lavington Bonython, also Mayor and later Lord Mayor of Adelaide, became editor. The Herald and Weekly Times took a controlling stake in The Advertiser in 1929. Through the 20th century, The Advertiser was the morning broadsheet, and The News the afternoon tabloid. On the death of Sir Keith Murdoch in 1952, ownership of The News passed to his son Rupert, who subsequently established News Limited and News Corporation. In 1931 The Advertiser took over its ailing competitor, the South Australian Register and The Chronicle, its Saturday sister publication. Following Sir Keith's death, and in response to suggestions of external influences from Victoria made by competing newspaper The Mail, the Chairman of The Advertiser's board published its policy in The Advertiser as follows: 'It is the same today as when the late Sir Langdon Bonython was in sole control. It is based upon a profound pride and belief in South Australia, and the system of private enterprise which has made this State what it is.' When Murdoch acquired The Herald and Weekly Times in 1987, he also acquired the remaining 48.7% share of The Advertiser. He sold The News in 1987. The News closed in 1992. He changed the format of The Advertiser from a broadsheet to a smaller tabloid format in November 1997. Both The Advertiser and the Sunday Mail are available for purchase throughout South Australia and some towns and regions in New South Wales, Victoria and the Northern Territory located near or adjacent to the South Australia state border such as Broken Hill, Mildura, Nhill and Alice Springs. According to The Advertiser's website, the newspaper is read by over 580,000 people each weekday, and by more than 740,000 people each Saturday. According to third-party web analytics providers Alexa and SimilarWeb, The Advertisers's website, adelaidenow.com.au, is the 268th and 313rd most visited website in Australia respectively, as of August 2015. SimilarWeb rates the site as the 29th most visited news website in Australia, attracting almost 1.8 million visitors per month. 