The Third East Asia Summit was the third meeting of the East Asia Summit (EAS) held in November 2007. The EAS is a pan-Asia forum held annually by the leaders of 16 countries in the East Asian region. EAS meetings are held after annual ASEAN leaders meetings. The Third EAS was held on November 21, 2007 in Singapore. The 16 countries involved are: The outcomes are summarised in the Chairman's Statement of the 3rd East Asia Summit Singapore, 21 November 2007. The issue of Myanmar or Burma, following the 2007 Burmese anti-government protests, was to be on the agenda for the third EAS It was originally suggested that the UN Secretary-General's Special Advisor Dr Ibrahim Gambari has been invited to brief the leaders at the summit. However following the ASEAN Summit the preceding day a pressure from Myanmar ASEAN decided that Dr Gambari will not brief the leaders but rather Myanmar Prime Minister Thein Sein will address the ASEAN Summit and ASEAN would facilitate briefings with other interested parties. Dr Gambari was available for private briefings of the leaders. The third EAS was expected to make an announcement on tackling climate change. At the Summit the Singapore Declaration on Climate Change, Energy and the Environment was signed establishing aspirational targets on climate change, energy and the environment. The Summit agreed to receive at the Fourth EAS the further report on the Comprehensive Economic Partnership in East Asia (CEPEA) proposed at the Second EAS. The Summit also agreed to the establishment of the Economic Research Institute for ASEAN and East Asia (ERIA). The Chairman's Statement of the 3rd East Asia Summit Singapore, 21 November 2007 said: 13. We agreed to the establishment of the Economic Research Institute of ASEAN and East Asia (ERIA) to be accommodated temporarily at the ASEAN Secretariat. We welcomed the report submitted to us by the Expert Group, which focuses on research topics of strategic interest to the EAS countries. We encouraged the Expert Group to continue its research work and we looked forward to practical policy recommendations to further regional integration and strengthen partnerships in East Asia. 14. We welcomed the progress report of the study by scholars and academics on a Comprehensive Economic Partnership in East Asia (CEPEA), and encouraged them to maintain good momentum in their work towards submitting a final report of recommendations through the Economic Ministers to us at the 4th East Asia Summit. It would be useful to incorporate the views of the private sector in the work process. The CEPEA should build upon and add value to our existing FTAs. We encouraged the expeditious conclusion of our ASEAN Plus 1 FTAs. Japan and China subsequently agreed in December 2007 to: enhance cooperation in East Asia regional economic integration, including the East Asian Free Trade Agreement (EAFTA), Comprehensive Economic Partnership in East Asia (CEPEA), and Research Institute for ASEAN and East Asia 