Threading is an ancient method of hair removal originating in Central Asia and India. In more recent times it has gained popularity in Western countries, especially with a cosmetic application (particularly for removing/shaping eyebrows). In threading, a thin (cotton or polyester) thread is doubled, then twisted. It is then rolled over areas of unwanted hair, plucking the hair at the follicle level. Unlike tweezing, where single hairs are pulled out one at a time, threading can remove short lines of hair. Advantages cited for eyebrow threading, as opposed to eyebrow waxing, are that it provides more precise control in shaping eyebrows and is gentler on the skin. It can be painful as several hairs are removed at once: however this can be minimised if it is done correctly. There are a few different techniques for threading. These include the hand method, mouth method and neck. Each technique has advantages and disadvantages; however, the mouth holding method is the fastest and most precise. Threading allows for a more defined and precise shape and can create better definition for eyebrows. It is also used as a method of removing unwanted hair on the entire face and upper lip area. Threading is not a good method for removing hair on arms or legs, as the hair in those regions is typically quite coarse and there is too much to remove. It is unknown where threading originated first, Central Asia or India. According to one theory, the practice started in India over 6000 years ago and spread throughout Asia, the Middle East, and in recent times Europe. The Arabic word for threading is 'Khite'; in Egypt it is also called 'Fatlah'. Threading for eyebrows is widely practiced in India, Indian women are generally doing their eyebrows once in three weeks, and threading is used for Full face, upper lip, chin, sideburns and cheeks too. Threading is widely practiced amongst Iranians, but it was originally only done when a woman was getting married or for special occasions. In ancient Persia (Iran), threading was a sign that a girl had reached adulthood. Threading is also popular in China and other East Asian countries such as Korea and was only historically done on brides and married women. 