The following is a comprehensive discography of the American singer Tina Turner. Turner's overall discography consists of nine studio albums, two live albums, two soundtracks, and five compilation albums. After joining Ike Turner's band as a background vocalist, the pair married and formed the duo, Ike & Tina Turner in 1960. They released a series of major hits on the R&B chart, including "Proud Mary" and "Nutbush City Limits". Ike & Tina Turner remained intact until the mid-1970s when their marriage and musical partnership ended. By this time, Tina Turner had already released two solo albums, Tina Turns the Country On (1974) and Acid Queen (1975), on the United Artists label to which she and Ike Turner were signed. She then continued as a solo artist with the albums Rough (1978) and Love Explosion (1979). However, none of these releases were commercially successful, and Turner left the label at the end of the decade. After collaborating with the British electronic group, B.E.F. in 1982, Turner signed a new contract with EMI Records in the UK, and released the single "Let's Stay Together" (a cover of the Al Green song) in late 1983. Produced by B.E.F., the single was a UK Top 10 hit. Import copies began to sell well in the US which prompted Capitol Records (a subsidiary of EMI) to sign Turner and release the single there themselves, which made the Billboard Top 30 in Spring 1984. By this time, Turner had begun work on a full album, Private Dancer, which was released in May 1984 and became a worldwide hit. It spawned a string of hit singles, including "What's Love Got to Do with It", which still stands as Turner's biggest ever hit, peaking at #1 on the Billboard Hot 100 for three weeks. The success of the album established Turner as a major solo artist, elevating her to superstar status, and her comeback during this period is widely regarded as one of the most successful of all time. Following her success in 1984, Turner co-starred with Mel Gibson in the 1985 film, Mad Max Beyond Thunderdome. She recorded two songs for the film's soundtrack, with "We Don't Need Another Hero (Thunderdome)" giving her another huge international hit. She then released her second album for Capitol in 1986, Break Every Rule, which also spawned major hits on the US Hot 100, including "Typical Male" (#2) and "What You Get Is What You See" (#13). Turner embarked on a large scale world tour in 1987, and released her first live album, Tina Live in Europe, in 1988. She returned with her next studio album, Foreign Affair, in 1989. Its lead single, "The Best" was a worldwide hit that year and the album sold over 1.5 million copies in the United Kingdom alone but was less successful in the US. Her first compilation album, Simply the Best, was released in 1991 and was another huge seller in the UK, selling over 2.4 million copies there. Turner then switched from the US Capitol label to Virgin Records (though both were subsidiaries of EMI, and would later be merged by EMI to become the Capitol Music Group in 2007). In 1993, she recorded the soundtrack to the film about her life, What's Love Got to Do with It, which spawned the single, "I Don't Wanna Fight", which became her first US Top 10 hit since 1986. In 1995 she performed the title song for the James Bond film GoldenEye. Her next studio album was 1996's Wildest Dreams, followed by 1999's Twenty Four Seven, which was her last studio album to date. With a career spanning five decades, Turner has become one of the top-selling music artists of all time in rock music, having sold more than 100 million albums and singles to date worldwide. 