UTC+03:00 is an identifier for a time offset from UTC of +03. In areas using this time offset, the time is three hours later than the Coordinated Universal Time (UTC). Following the ISO 8601 standard, a time with this offset would be written as, for example, 2015-08-15T21:55:37+03:00 (boldface only here to be clear). Some areas in the world use UTC+03:00 all year, other areas only part of the year. Most of European Russia, including Moscow, St. Petersburg, Rostov on Don, Novaya Zemlya, Franz Josef Land. From October 26, 2014 Moscow and most other parts of European Russia started using UTC+3 again, all year around. Besides the names mentioned above, the name 'Eastern Europe Forward Time' (EEFT) is sometimes used. Russia - Moscow Time all railroad time in Russia, including railroad in Kaliningrad Oblast. Comoros Djibouti Eritrea Ethiopia Kenya Madagascar Mayotte (France) and Scattered Islands in the Indian Ocean (Bassas da India, Europa Island, Juan de Nova Island) Somalia South Sudan Sudan Tanzania Uganda Arabia Standard Time, or AST, is used by some countries in the Middle East. As this time zone is predominantly in the equatorial region, there is no significant change in day length throughout the year, so daylight saving time is not observed. Arabia Standard Time is used by the following countries: Bahrain Iraq Kuwait Saudi Arabia Yemen Qatar Notes: The westernmost point at which UTC+03 with no DST is applied is the westernmost point of Sudan, in the West Darfur state, at the border with Chad; Geneina, the capital of West Darfur, located very close to that point, has a longitude of 2227' E. The easternmost point at which UTC+03 with no DST is applied is actually the easternmost point of Saudi Arabia, in the Eastern Province, at the border with Oman, with a longitude of roughly 5520' E. Bulgaria Cyprus (including Akrotiri and Dhekelia (UK) and Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus) Estonia Finland (including land) Greece Latvia Lithuania Ukraine Moldova Romania Turkey Israel Jordan Lebanon Palestinian territories Syria 