Vala is an object-oriented programming language with a self-hosting compiler that generates C code and uses the GObject system (that "can be seen as an alternative to C-derived languages such as C++ and Objective-C"). Vala is syntactically similar to C# and includes several features such as: anonymous functions, signals, properties, generics, assisted memory management, exception handling, type inference, and foreach statements. Its developers Jrg Billeter and Raffaele Sandrini aim to bring these features to the plain C runtime with little overhead and no special runtime support by targeting the GObject object system. Rather than compiling directly to machine code or assembly language, it compiles to a higher level intermediate language. It source-to-source compiles to C, which is then compiled with a C compiler for a given platform, such as GCC. For memory management, the GObject system provides reference counting. In C, a programmer must manually manage adding and removing references, but in Vala, managing such reference counts is automated if a programmer uses the language's built-in reference types rather than plain pointers. Using functionality from native code libraries requires writing vapi files, defining the library interfacing. Writing these interface definitions is well-documented for C libraries, especially when based on GObject. However, C++ libraries are not supported. Vapi files are provided for a large portion of the GNOME platform, including GTK+. Vala was conceived by Jrg Billeter and was implemented by him and Raffaele Sandrini, finishing a self-hosting compiler in May 2006. A simple "Hello, World!" vala program (see also GTK+ hello world) A more complex version, showing some of Vala's object-oriented features: An example using GTK+ to create a GUI "Hello, World!" program: The last example needs an extra parameter to compile on GNOME3 platforms: This is the converted C code: There are various projects in various states of stability in order to provide IDE support for Vala: Anjuta Github's Atom (text editor) (With the Vala package installed). GNOME Builder Emacs Euclide Geany MonoDevelop NetBeans RedCar Scratch (elementary OS) Sublime Text (syntax plugin) TextMate Vala Toys for Gedit Val(a)IDE (itself written in Vala, discontinued) Valable, a Vala plug-in for Eclipse. Valama Valencia Vim (syntax plugin) 