Valley City State University (VCSU) is an institution of higher learning in Valley City, North Dakota, United States, part of the eleven-member North Dakota University System. Founded in 1890 as a territorial normal school, VCSU offers over 80 undergraduate programs in Business, Information Technology, Communication Arts, Social Science, Education, Psychology, Fine Arts, Health, Physical Education, Math, and Science. An online Master of Education degree program is also available.Last year VCSU graduated 302 students, the largest class in it's 125 year history. Since 1996, VCSU has been a "laptop" campus by issuing laptop computers to full-time students. The cost of the laptops are part of the university's technology fee which also covers other educational technology enhancements such as campus-wide wireless network access and smart classrooms. VCSU ranked above the national average in student satisfaction regarding tuition being a worthwhile investment (2008 Survey) and has been voted U.S. News 'Best College' for 18 Consecutive years! VCSU is listed as a Historic District on the National Register of Historic Places. Valley City State athletic teams, nicknamed the Vikings, are part of the National Association of Intercollegiate Athletics (NAIA), competing as a member of the North Star Athletic Association since 2013-14 as a carter member. The Vikings competed as a independent in the Association of Independent Institutions (AII). Prior to being an independent, they competed in the now defunct Dakota Athletic Conference (DAC) from 2000-01 to 2004-05, and the North Dakota College Athletic Conference (NDCAC) prior to 2000. Men's sports include baseball, basketball, cross country, football, golf, and track and field; while women's sports include basketball, cross country, golf, softball, track and field and volleyball. Valley City State University welcomes numerous International students to their campus each year. For the 2015-16 year, 21 international students are enrolled at VCSU. Thomas Kleppe (19192007), former U.S. Representative from North Dakota and U.S. Secretary of the Interior Paul Fjelde - noted sculptor and professor Earl Pomeroy, U.S. Representative from North Dakota Gary Tharaldson, Founder of the Tharaldson Companies Carleton Opgaard, noted educator James D. Ployhar, noted composer and music educator 