The Venezuelan Professional Baseball League or Liga Venezolana de Bisbol Profesional (LVBP) is the highest level baseball league in Venezuela. Baseball exploded in Venezuela in 1941, following the world championship in Havana. By then, the appearance of professional baseball in Venezuela attracted many ball players from the Caribbean and the United States to the country, showing a more integrated sport there than it was in the United States. This is evidenced in the hiring of stellar players like Ramn Bragaa, Martn Dihigo, Oscar Estrada, Cocaina Garcia, Bertrum Hunter, Roy Campanella, Sam Jethroe, Satchel Paige, and Roy Welmaker. On December 27, 1945, the owners of the Caracas Brewery (Cervecera Caracas, present day Caracas Lions or Leones del Caracas), Vargas Wisemen (Sabios de Vargas), the Magellan Navigators (Navegantes del Magallanes), and Venezuela BBC created the Venezuelan Professional Baseball League. The league was formally registered as an institution during January 1946, and in the same month organized its first tournament, starting on January 3, 1946. Vargas Wisemen, led by Daniel 'Chino' Cannico, became the first champion, with a record of 18 wins and 12 loses. During the first tournaments, games were played on Thursdays and Saturdays on the afternoons, and Sundays in the morning. This was the norm until Cervecera Caracas' parklocated in the San Agustn del Norte zone of Caracaswas fitted with electric lights, enabling its use during night games. Thus, a game was added on Tuesday nights. Eventually, the tournament was changed to accommodate two rounds, with the top team of each round having a best-of-5 play-off to determine the champion. On August 8, 1952, Pablo Morales and Oscar Prieto Ortiz purchased the Cervecera Caracas team from Martn Tovar Lange, who had previously purchased the team form its previous owners, Caracas Brewery Co. The new owners renamed the team (reigning champions as Caracas Lions (Leones del Caracas), after the full name of the city, Santiago de Leon de Caracas. On October 17, 1952, the 1952-1953 tournament started, with the first game of Leones del Caracas vs. Venezuela BBC. Leones del Caracas would win their inaugural tournament. The next tournament would see the departure of the teams Sabios de Vargas and Venezuela BBC due to economic problems, being replaced by two teams (Gavilanes and Pastora) from the professional league of the Zulia State, from western Venezuela. In 1955 a new team was added in the place of the departed Vargas, named Pampero; while the Venezuela BBC was moved out of Caracas, and renamed the Valencia Industrymen (Industriales de Valencia). The 1956-1957 tournament would see further changes: the Navegantes del Magallanes team was purchased by advertisers Joe Novas and Joe Cruz and renamed as Oriente, leaving the league made of Leones del Caracas, Oriente, Pampero, Industriales de Valencia. In 1962, the La Guaira Sharks (Tiburones de La Guaira) were brought into the league to replace Pampero. In 1965, the league added two more teams, the Lara Cardinals (Cardenales de Lara) and the Aragua Tigers (Tigres de Aragua). For the 1968-1969 tournament, the Industrymen left the city of Valencia and relocated to Acarigua as a new team: Los Llaneros. This left Valencia without a team, prompting the move of Navegantes del Magallanes from Caracas to Valencia, and their return to their original name for the 1969-1970 tournament. In 1969, the Zulia Eagles (guilas del Zulia) were brought into the league to replace the Valencia Industrymen (Industriales de Valencia), the original Venezuela team. The '70s saw the first successes for Venezuelan teams outside of Venezuela since the amateur championships of the 1940s, with the Navegantes del Magallanes winning two Caribbean Series. It also saw problems for the league, in the form of the strike that prevented the 1973-1974 tournament, and the problems the Caracas Lions and La Guaira Sharks had in 1975-1976 to secure a baseball park to play their home games. Thisresulted in both teams merged into one, and forced to move to the city of Acarigua. The '80s saw the Caracas Lions winning five tournaments, consolidating their lead as the most successful team in the league. The Lions also went on to win three championships in a row starting in 1982, and their first Caribbean Series. Also in the '80s, the Zulia Eagles won their first two championships, all the way to also winning their first two Caribbean Series. In 1991, the league expanded from six to eight teams, with the addition of the Eastern Caribbeans (Caribes de Oriente), who are now the Anzotegui Caribbeans (Caribes de Anzotegui); and the Cabimas Oilers (Petroleros), who became the Llanos Shepherds (Pastora de los Llanos), and from the 2007-08 season on, the Margarita Braves (Bravos de Margarita). This led to a change in format, with the eight teams being organized in two divisions: the Eastern Division (Divisin Oriental) with the teams Caracas, Magallanes, La Guaira and Oriente; and the Western Division (Divisin Occidental) with the teams Zulia, Lara, Aragua and Cabimas. The first two teams from each division by the end of the first league phase of the tournament would qualify to the round-robin semifinals. The format would change again some years later, with the addition of a wildcard team in the semifinals: the best placed third-place from the two divisions would accompany the other four teams in a round-robin semifinal. For the 2007-08 season, with the move of the Pastora team from the western city of Acarigua to the eastern city of Porlamar, the Western Division and the Eastern Division were merged in one single division of eight teams, with the top five teams advancing to the semifinals. In recent years, Tigres de Aragua has become the most dominant team of the league, winning the crown six times in the last fifteen years, although Leones del Caracas and Navegantes del Magallanes remain the most victorious Venezuelan teams in the history of the league. The league has scheduled All Star Games each year, sometime featuring criollos (Venezuelan) vs importados (foreigners) or Western Division vs Eastern Division, and even a Venezuela's League Stars vs. Rep. Dominicana's League Stars interleague all star game during the 2007-2008 and 2011-2012 tournaments. The league houses eight teams in one single division and plays two round robin league phases and a playoff final (as the winterleagues in the Dominican Rep. and Colombia do). Currently, the teams play 63 games, 9 games against each of the other 7 teams, from October to December in the first league phase. The top five teams move on to another round robin league phase of 16 games per team in January known as the semifinals. The top two teams from this round advance to a best-of-7 series in a 2-3-2 homefield format at the end of January. This best-of-7 series determines the league champion. The Venezuelan champion moves on to the Caribbean Series to face the champions of the baseball leagues of the Dominican Republic, Puerto Rico and Mexico. Venezuela has won the Caribbean World Series seven times, most recently in 2009 by the Tigres de Aragua (Aragua Tigers), after having won the LVBP title during the 2008-09 LVBP season. (+) Won the title as Cervecera Caracas. The team changed owners and name in 1952, but documents made public on October 4, 2011, clearly state that the franchise official name (Caracas Baseball Club) remained constant during all sale transactions in 1949, 1952 and 2001. This has resulted in a change on the historical stats of Leones del Caracas. () The team moved to a different city, and changed its name in 1968. The team disappeared by 1969, and was replaced with a new franchise. () The team folded at the end of the 1952-53 season, and was replaced with a new franchise. (*) Played only in a National Championship Series called El Rotatorio. 