Violence against sex-workers deals with the violence suffered by sex workers, who are predominantly women, including in extreme cases murder both inside and outside the workplace. In 2004 the homicide rate for female sex workers in the United States was estimated to be 204 per 100,000, although this figure mixes illegal work with legal work. This figure is considerably higher than that for the next riskiest occupations in the United States during a similar period (4 per 100,000 for female liquor store workers and 29 per 100,000 for male taxicab drivers). The prevalence of violence against prostitutes varies by location. A study of female prostitutes in Vancouver, Canada over the age of 14 who used illicit drugs other than marijuana found that 57% of sex-workers experienced some form of gender-based violence over an 18-month period. However, a study of 1,000 female (both cisgender and transgender) sex-workers in Phnom Penh, Cambodia found 93% of women surveyed had been the victim of rape in the past year. Physical violence is defined by the World Health Organization as "the intentional use of physical force or power, threatened or actual, against oneself, another person, or against a group or community, which either results in or has a high likelihood of resulting in injury, death, psychological harm, maldevelopment, or deprivation" Physical violence is more commonly experienced by outdoor sex-workers with 47% of prostitutes working outdoors reporting being kicked, punched, or slapped in one study In another study, 74% of sex-workers reported having experienced some form of physical abuse in their lifetime. Psychological abuse, also referred to as mental abuse or emotional abuse is a form of abuse characterized by a person subjecting or exposing another to behavior that may result in psychological trauma, including anxiety, chronic depression, or post-traumatic stress disorder. The United Nations Population Fund says that this type of violence "Includes, but is not limited to, being insulted (e.g. called derogatory names) or made to feel bad about oneself; being humiliated or belittled in front of other people; being threatened with loss of custody of ones children; being confined or isolated from family or friends; being threatened with harm to oneself or someone one cares about; repeated shouting, inducing fear through intimidating words or gestures; controlling behaviour; and the destruction of possessions." There are certain types of psychological or emotional abuse that sex workers are more prone to such as denial of basic needs, forced drug or alcohol consumption, and being arrested for carrying condoms to name a few. Being arrested for carrying condoms is considered psyIn one study, 78% of sex-workers reported having experienced emotional or psychological abuse in their lifetime. Sexual violence is any sexual act or attempt to obtain a sexual act by violence or coercion, unwanted sexual comments or advances, acts to traffic a person or acts directed against a person's sexuality, regardless of the relationship to the victim. The risks of sexual abuse are overall lower than the risks of physical abuse with the exception of indoor prostitutes who report a higher rate of rape or attempted rape than any one type of physical violence. In one study, 44% of sex-workers reported having experienced sexual abuse in their lifetime. Studies have shown that younger sex-workers tend to experience more client violence than their older colleagues. There are substantial differences in rates of victimization between street prostitutes and indoor sex workers who work as call girls, or in brothels and massage parlors. Women who work legally in licensed brothels are much less likely to be victimized as are indoor workers in countries where sex work is legal. A 1999 study of 240 prostitutes found that half of sex-workers working outside faced some type of violence in the past six months, compared to a quarter of those working indoors. However there are rare attacks or murders of sex workers in licensed brothels. For example, in June 2003, a Thai sex worker was murdered with a knife by a customer in the Pascha brothel in Kln, Germany. She managed to press the alarm button in her room and security personnel caught the perpetrator. Violence against male prostitutes is less common. Perpetrators may include violent clients and pimps. Sex workers themselves are often forced by laws on sex work to take their clients to out of the way places where they are less likely to be interrupted, which is very convenient for their attackers. In jurisdictions where sex work is legal but has laws (on the books) criminalizing working together for safety, solo sex workers are forced to work alone, increasing risk. The criminalization of clients has similar effects. In countries such as the United States where sex work is illegal, they are often treated as criminals rather than victims. Stigma also means in certain countries the police are less likely to investigate attacks on sex workers. According to a study conducted on one hundred and thirty people working in San Francisco as street sex workers, 82% had been physically assaulted, 83% had been threatened with a weapon and 68% had been raped while working as prostitutes. Police officers are also common perpetrators of violence against prostitutes. A study of sex-workers in Phnom Penh, Cambodia found that half of the women had been beaten by police and about a third had been gang-raped by police. The decriminalization of sex work in New Zealand has shown that violence is reduced when sex workers are not forced to work alone, or in isolated places. Sex work was always legal in New Zealand but decriminalization removed laws that increased danger. Sex workers (particularly those engaging in street prostitution) are also sometimes targeted by serial killers, who may consider them easy pickings and less likely to be missed, or who use the religious and social stigma associated with sex workers as justification for their murder. The unidentified serial killer known as Jack the Ripper killed at least five sex workers in London in 1888. Due to the frequent murders of prostitutes at that time and place, however, it is difficult to be certain of the number killed by Jack the Ripper. These particular murders are distinguished from other murders of sex workers during the same time period due to the post-mortem mutilations that occurred, and it is for that reason that other murders of prostitutes are not usually attributed to the Ripper, or are disputed. Peter Sutcliffe (aka the Yorkshire Ripper) murdered 13 women, some of whom were sex workers, from 1975-1980 in Northern England. Gary Ridgway (aka the Green River Killer), confessed to killing 48 sex workers from 1982 to 1998, making him one of the most prolific serial killers in American history. Robert Hansen murdered between 15 and 21 sex workers, near Anchorage, Alaska, between 1980 and 1983. Joel Rifkin confessed to killing 17 sex workers in the New York area between 1989 and 1993, without there having been a missing persons report filed on any of the women during that time. More recently, Robert Pickton, a Canadian who lived near Vancouver, made headlines after the remains of numerous missing sex workers were found on his family farm. He has now been convicted of the murders of 6 women who went missing from Vancouver's Downtown Eastside, and is suspected by police of killing at least twenty more (though no charges have been filed in relation to their deaths). In December 2007 he was sentenced to life in prison, with no possibility of parole for 25 years. In December 2006, Steve Wright murdered five sex workers in Ipswich, England (see Ipswich serial murders). The United Nations Population Fund, in conjunction with several other organizations, recommends community empowerment, led by sex workers, as a way to combat violence against sex-workers. UNPF also advocates for changing perceptions to view sex work as work, rather than an illegal activity. UN Women supports the decriminalization of sex work in order to protect sex-workers from violence and abuse and encourages the criminalization of forms of violence, coercion and exploitation in sex work. 