Wellcome Book Prize is an annual British literary award sponsored by Wellcome Trust. In keeping with the vision and goals of Wellcome Trust, the Book Prize "celebrates the topics of health and medicine in literature", including fiction and non-fiction. The winner receives 30,000 making it "one of the most remunerative literature awards on offer." The current prize for medicine in literature was inaugurated in 2009, but there was an older award with the same name. In 1998, Wellcome Trust began offering a prize that would enable a practicing life scientist to take time off and write a science book for the general reader. Applicants would submit a book outline and sample chapter, winners would then be obligated to write and publish the book. It appears the only winner was Michael J. Morgan for The Space Between Our Ears: How the Brain Represents Visual Space (2001), before the prize (for science writing) was discontinued. From 2009-2012 it was called the Welcome Trust Book Prize. In 2013 there was no award however there were changes to the prize including an increase in prize money from 25,000 to 30,000 and a new timetable of key dates: shortlist in February and winner in April. Blue Ribbon () = winner 2009 Andrea Gillies, Keeper: Living with Nancy - A Journey into Alzheimer's Abraham Verghese, Cutting for Stone Brian Dillon, The Hypochondriacs: Nine Tormented Lives Havi Carel, Illness (Art of Living) Allegra Goodman, Intuition Jonny Steinberg, Sizwe's Test: A Young Man's Journey Through Africa's AIDS Epidemic, aka Three-Letter Plague 2010 Rebecca Skloot, The Immortal Life of Henrietta Lacks Gareth Williams, Angel of Death: The Story of Smallpox Emma Henderson, Grace Williams Says it Loud John Nichol, Medic: Saving Lives - from Dunkirk to Afghanistan Lionel Shriver, So Much For That Tim Parks, Teach Us to Sit Still: A Sceptic's Search for Health and Healing 2011 Alice LaPlante, Turn of Mind Philip Roth, Nemesis Louisa Young, My Dear I Wanted to Tell You Ann Patchett, State of Wonder Siddhartha Mukherjee, The Emperor of All Maladies: A Biography of Cancer Sarah Manguso, The Two Kinds of Decay 2012 Thomas Wright, Circulation: William Harvey, a Man in Motion Mohammed Hanif, Our Lady of Alice Bhatti Peter James, Perfect People Rose Tremain, Merivel: A Man of His Time John M. Coates, The Hour Between Dog and Wolf: Risk-taking, Gut Feelings and the Biology of Boom and Bust Nick Coleman, The Train in the Night: A Story of Music and Loss 2013 (no award) 2014 Andrew Solomon, Far from the Tree: Parents, Children, and the Search for Identity Elizabeth Gilbert, The Signature of All Things Emily Mayhew, Wounded: From Battlefield to Blighty Adam Rutherford, Creation: The Origin of Life Oliver Sacks, Hallucinations Sarah Wise, Inconvenient People 2015 Marion Coutts, The Iceberg: A Memoir Henry Marsh, Do No Harm: Stories of Life, Death and Brain Surgery Sarah Moss, Bodies of Light Alice Roberts, The Incredible Unlikeliness of Being: Evolution and the Making of Us Scott Stossel, My Age of Anxiety: Fear, Hope, Dread, and the Search for Peace of Mind Miriam Toews, All My Puny Sorrows 