The Yao nationality (its great majority branch is also known as Mien; Traditional Chinese: , Simplified Chinese: , Pinyin: Yo z; Vietnamese: ngi Dao) is a government classification for various minorities in China. They form one of the 55 ethnic minority groups officially recognized by the People's Republic of China, where they reside in the mountainous terrain of the southwest and south. They also form one of the 54 ethnic groups officially recognized by Vietnam. In the last census in 2000, they numbered 2,637,421 in China, and roughly 470,000 in Vietnam. The origins of the Yao can be traced back 2,000 years ago, starting in Hunan Province. The Yao and Miao people were among the rebels during the Miao Rebellions against the Ming dynasty. As the Han Chinese expanded in southern China, the Yao retreated into the highlands between Hunan and Guizhou to the north and Guangdong and Guangxi to the south, and stretching into eastern Yunnan. Around 1890 the Guangdong government started taking action against Yao in northwestern Guangdong. The first Chinese exonym for "Yao people" was the graphic pejorative yao ("dog radical" and yao phonetic) "jackal", which 20th century language reforms changed twice; first with the invented character yao ("human radical") "the Yao", and then with yao ( "jade radical") "precious jade; green jasper". During the Laotian Civil War, Yao tribes of Laos had a good relationship with U.S. forces and were dubbed to be an "efficient friendly force". They fought in favour of government against the communists. This relationship caused the new communist Laotian government to target Yao tribal groups for revenge once the war was over. This triggered further immigration into Thailand, where the tribes would be put into camps along the Thailand-Laos border. After obtaining refugee status from the Thai government and with the help of the United Nations, many Yao people were able to obtain sponsorship into the United States (although many remain in Thailand). Most of the Yao who have immigrated to the United States have settled along the Western part of the U.S., mainly in Central and Northern California such as Visalia, Fresno, Oakland, Oroville, Redding, Richmond, Sacramento, but also in parts of Oregon like Portland, Salem, and Beaverton as well as the state of Washington in Seattle and Renton. See Mien American for those identified as Mien. The typical houses of the Yao are rectangular and they have structures made of wood and bamboo. Normally it has three rooms: a room and two dormitories in the lateral side. Each one of these rooms has a small oven to cook. The men and the women cover their heads with a black or red scarf. Some women substitute this scarf by a turban that can adopt different forms. The traditional suit of the women is of bright colors. They also decorate their shirts with decorations made out of silver. In Vietnam, Yao people celebrate many exciting and meaningful festivals such as Nhn chung lnh (literally: Red rice, Green rice"), Nhiang chm ao (literally: Jumping Festival). The Yao, or Iu Mien, practice Yao Taoism, a religion based on medieval Chinese Taoism, although many have converted to Buddhism and few to Christianity. Though some people have converted to other religions, many still practice their native traditions. Marriage is traditionally arranged by go-betweens who represent the boy's family to the girl's parents. If the union is acceptable, a bride price is negotiated, typically ranging from three to ten silver bars, worth about $100 U.S. dollars each, a partial artifact from the opium trade. The wedding takes place in two installments, first at the bride's house, followed by a procession to the groom's house where a second ceremony occurs. There are several distinct groups within the Yao nationality, and they speak several different languages, The Iu Mien make up 70% of the Yao populace. MiaoYao languages The Mien speak Mienic languages (Chinese: Miny, Traditional Chinese: , Simplified Chinese: ), including: MianJin languages Iu Mien, 2,172,000 speakers (1,699,750 in China, 350,000 in Vietnam, 40,000 in Thailand, 20,250 in Laos, 60,000 in the United States, 2,000 in France) [2] Kim Mun (also known as Lanten), more than 300,000 Yao people [3] Biao Mon, 20,000 speakers [4] Dzao Min, 60,000 speakers [5] Biao-Jiao Mien, 43,000 speakers [6] Hmongic languages Bunu languages Pa-Hng Younuo Jiongnai Lakkja language (a TaiKadai language) Chinese about 500,000 Yao speak Chinese dialects In addition to China, Yao also live in northern Vietnam (where they are called Dao), northern Laos, and Burma. There are around 60,000 Yao in northern Thailand, where they are one of the six main hill tribes. The lowland-living Lanten of Laos, who speak Kim Mun, and the highland-living Iu Mien of Laos are two different Yao groups. There are also many Yao living in the United States, mainly refugees from the highlands of Laos who speak the Iu Mien language. The Iu Mien do not call themselves "Yao". Not all "Yao" are Iu Mien. A group of 61,000 people on the island of Hainan speak the Yao language Kim Mun 139,000 speakers of Kim Mun live in other parts of China (Yunnan and Guangxi), and 174,500 live in Laos and Vietnam. The Bunu call themselves Nuox [no], Buod nuox [pono], Dungb nuox [tuno], or their official name Yaof zuf [ausu]. Only 258,000 of the 439,000 people categorised as Bunu in the 1982 census speak Bunu; 100,000 speak Zhuang, and 181,000 speak Chinese and Bouyei. Mao Zongwu (2004:7-8) gives a detailed list of various Yao autonyms (i.e., self-designated names) and the Chinese names of various groups and clans associated with them. The autonyms are written in the International Phonetic Alphabet with numerical Chao tones. Autonym mjen31 or ju31 mjen31 : Pangu Yao , Pan Yao , Panhu Yao , Trans-Mountain / Guoshan Yao , Large-Board / Daban Yao , Small-Board / Xiaoban Yao , Board / Ban Yao , Top-Board / Dingban Yao , Sharp-Headed / Jiantou Yao , Level-Headed / Pingtou Yao , Red-Head / Hongtou Yao , Arrow-Pole / Jian'gan Yao , Cattle-Horn Yao / Niujiao , Tu Yao (in Hezhou County, Guangxi), Native / Bendi Yao , Flowery / Hua Yao (in Yangshuo County, Guangxi), Ao Yao , Zheng Yao , Liang Yao Autonym kim33 mun33 or kem53 di35 mun21 : Blue-Indigo / Landian Yao , Shanzi Yao , Flowery-Headed / Huatou Yao , Sand / Sha Yao , Level-Headed / Pingtou Yao , Bazi Yao Autonym bjau31 mn31 or i31 mun31 : Min Yao , "Four Great" Min Yao Autonym bjau31 min31 or tau44 ko55 me55 : East Mountain / Dongshan Yao (in Quanzhou County, Guangxi), Dog-Headed / Goutou Yao Autonym dzau53 min53 : Bapai Yao Autonym ju21 jn24 , pjo31 toa53 jeu31 , or an33 tai33 : Red Yao (in Longsheng County, Guangxi), Plains / Pingdi Yao Autonym pu53 nu24 : Beilou Yao , Beilong Yao , West Mountain / Xishan Yao , East Mountain Yao / Dongshan (in Bama County, Guangxi), Tudi Yao , Tu Yao (in Pingguo County and Mashan County, Guangxi), Mountain / Shan Yao , Man Yao , East Valley / Dongnong Yao , West Valley / Xinong Yao , Fan Yao , Anding Yao , White Yao , Black Yao , Black-Trouser / Heiku Yao , Long-Shirt / Changshan Yao Autonym nau35 klau42 or pou22 nou12 : White-Trouser / Baiku Yao , Siting Yao , Situan Yao Autonym kj33 nai33 : Hualan Yao Autonym pa31 35 : Dog Yao , Eight-Surname / Baxing Yao , Red Yao (in Liping and Congjiang Counties of Guizhou; Rongshui and Longsheng Counties of Guangxi), Wood Yao Autonym mn33 nai33 : Flowery Yao (in Longhui, Dongkou, Chenxi, Xupu, and Tongdao Counties of Hunan) Autonym ou13 n13 : Red Yao Autonym lak24 kja24 : Tea Mountain / Chashan Yao Groups considered to be "Plains Yao" (Pingdi Yao ) include: Autonym Bingduoyou (Pingdi Yao , Dainaijiang ): in Jianghua County of Hunan; Gongcheng , Fuchuan , Zhongshan , and Lingui counties of Guangxi Autonym Yeheni (Pingdi Yao ): in Jianghua County , Hunan (Jianghua County Almanac). The Yeheni speak a divergent Chinese dialect. Autonym Younian (Pinghua-speaking Red Yao ; ou13 en13): in Longsheng and Guanyang counties of Guangxi. According to Chen Qiguang (2013:30), the u21 ien21 number about 10,000 speakers in Sishui , Madi , Mengshan , Jiangliu , and other locations of Longsheng County. Autonym Shanjie (Shanzi Yao ): in Fangcheng , Guangxi Autonym Youjia (Yaojia ): in Guanyang County , Guangxi Jingdong Yao (autonym: Lewu people ): Jingdong County , Yunnan. According to the Jingdong County Almanac (1994:519), ethnic Yao numbered 3,889 individuals in 1990, and lived mainly in Chaqing and Dasongshu of Taizhong . Tim Doling (2010:82-83) lists the following Yao (spelled Dao in Vietnamese orthography) subgroups in northern Vietnam. Mien groups Im Mien: Black Dao of Dien Bien and Lai Chau; Red Dao of southern Lao Cai, Yen Bai, and Son La Kim Mien: Dao T Pn (Dao i Bn, Dao Coc Ngng, Dao Sng) of Ha Giang, Cao Bang, and Yen Bai; Red Dao of northern and eastern Lao Cai; Hongtou Red Dao in northern Lai Chau Kiem Mien: Red Dao of Sa Pa Kam Mien: Coin Dao of Ha Giang, Cao Bang, Tuyen Quang, Thai Nguyen, and Bac Can Kem Mien: Coin Dao of Hoa Binh and Son La Qun Cht Mien: Hoa Binh, Son La, Tuyen Quang, Bac Can (also called the Dao Nga Hong, Dao Sn u) L Gang Mien: Dao L Gang and Dao u Trc of Ha Giang, Cao Bang, Lang Son, and Mong Cai Mun groups Kim Mun: Dao Ln Tin (including the Dao Tuyn, Dao o Di, and Dao u Bng) Kim Meun: Dao Qun Trng and Dao Thanh Y According to Doling (2010), only Kim Mun, Kim Mien, and L Gang may be found outside Vietnam. Nguyen (2004:14-15, 128) lists i Bn, Tiu Bn, Kh Bch, and Ln Tin as the 4 primary subdivisions of ethnic Yao in Vietnam. i Bn Dao (Hng Thu Do, Dao Coc Ngng, Dao Qu Lm): located in Yen Bai, Lao Cai, Lai Chau, Tuyen Quang, Ha Giang, Cao Bang, Bac Kan, Thai Nguyen Dao Qun Cht (Dao Sn u, Dao Tam o, Dao Nga Hong): located in Hoa Binh, Ha Tay, Phu Tho, Vinh Yen, Son La, Yen Bai Dao Thanh Phn (Dao Coc Mn, Dao i Vn, Dao L Gang, Dao D Kin, Dao Thu): located in Tuyen Quang, Bac Kan, Thai Nguyen, Lang Son, Quang Ninh, Bac Giang Tiu Bn Dao Tin (Dao eo Tin): located in Hoa Binh, Phu Tho, Son La, Tuyen Quang, Cao Bang, Bac Kan Kh Bch Dao Qun Trng: located in Yen Bai, Lao Cai, Tuyen Quang, Ha Giang (known as Dao H in Yen Bai, Lao Cai) Ln Tin Dao Thanh Y: located in Tuyen Quang, Bac Guang, Quang Ninh Dao o Di (Dao Tuyn, Dao Chm, Dao Sln Ch): located in Yen Bai, Lao Cai, Tuyen Quang, Ha Giang, Bac Kan In China, Yao peoples are distributed primarily in the provinces Hunan, Guangdong, Guangxi, Guizhou, and Yunnan. Ethnic groups derived from the Yao of China are found in Vietnam, Laos, and Thailand. The Yao of Guizhou are found in the following locations (Guizhou Province Almanac 2002). Libo County: townships of Yaoshan , Yaolu , and Yao'ai Shiqian County (2,522 people): 9 Yao villages including Leijiatun and Wurongguan of Beita Township , and Shuiwei Village of Huaqiao Township Wangmo County: the 4 villages of Shangyoumai Xiaoyoumai Xinzhai and Jiaxian in Youmai Township Majiang County: 23 Yao villages in Longshan Township , including Heba (with 6,474 people) Liping County Shunhua Township (1,316 people in 1992): Gongcun Gaoka Yibuwan Yishu ; Gaozizhai of Gaoshu Village Leidong Township (1,576 people in 1992): Jinchengzhai and Yibizhai of Jincheng Village , Sanshanzhai of Xilao Village ; Cenpangzhai Nongbozhai Yunnanzhai Congjiang County: 2 subgroups of Red Yao and Pan Yao Red Yao Cuili Township : Gaomang Xinzhai Shujiawan Wucai Jiage Baiyanchong Raojia Jiabang Township : Dazhou Pan Yao Xishan Township : Cengang Gaojiao Qiuka Douli Township : Dengmian Changka Gaoliu Beitong Xiutang Township : Dage Yusha Jiujia Baidao Wubu Xilin Zaibian Township : Zezhui Xiajiang Township : Huanglang Yongli Township : Dashan Laozhai Gangbian Huangnijing Donglang Township : Baidui Rongjiang County Tashi Township (2,979 people): Zedong Zaiyong Dangxiang Tashi Dangdiao Zeba Qiaoyang . Pingjiang Township : Jijiaoba Balu Pingyong Township : Sanbuqiao Qiaohai Sanjiang Township : Wuhong Liangwang Township : Cen'ao Pingyou Township : Shuangxikou Bakai Leishan County Dadi Township : Longtanggou Paisong Pingzhai Laozhai Beilue Pangjia Jieli Gaolue Tongwu Yeliao Xiaowu Baimizhai Hebian Liuwu Township : Liuwu Qiaosang Township : Xiagaojian Gulu Township : Nanping Danzhai County: Pailu Yangwu Jiapei Jianhe County: Zhandi Village, Taiyong Township Sandu County: Wuxia Pu'an Jiaxiong Shangjiang Niuchang Luodian County: Ankang of Luotuo ; Naji Nakao Nanao Luoyang Longping Bianyang of Fengting Ziyun County (297 people): Tangguan Village, Maoping Township Guanling County (189 people) The Yao of Guizhou have various autonyms, such as: to55 mo55 (), in Yaoshan , Libo County. The Buyi people call them ou21. nu55 hou33 (), in Yaolu , Libo County. The Shui people call them miou35 lo55. tu33 mu33 (), in Yao'ai , Libo County. The Buyi people call them ou21. ma55 (), in Youmai , Wangmo County. o21 min21 (), in Rongjiang, Leishan, Danzhai, Jianhe, Congjiang, and Sandu Counties. Some subgroups of ethnic Yao in Hunan include: Pan Yao (Mian ): in Jianghua, Chenxian, Lanshan, Ningyuan, Daoxian, Guiyang, Lingling, Chengbu, Chenxi, Xinning; speak a Mienic language. Guoshan Yao : in Jianghua, Lanshan, Ningyuan; speak a Mienic language. Huajiao Yao (Wunai ): in Longhui, Tongdao, Xupu, Chenxi; speak a Hmongic language. Batong Yao : in Xinning; speak a Hmongic language. Pingdi Yao (Bingduoyou ): in Jianghua, Jiangyong, and speak a Chinese dialect. Qixing Yao : in Chenxi, and speak a Chinese dialect. The Hunan Province Gazetteer (1997) gives the following autonyms for various peoples classified by the Chinese government as Yao. ju21 mien21 : in much of Xiangxi Prefecture tom21 pen21 ju21 : in Xintian County, Yizhang County, Changning County ku21 go55 ju21 : in Lanshan County, Jianghua County thou21 ju21 dzau21 min21 : in Shuangpai County, Dao County, Ningyuan County Donglixiao : in Xinning County; also called Bunu , Donglixiao , or Dong Yao (Xinning County Gazetteer 2009). Their language is called Donghua . mm21 nai33 : in Longhui County, Xupu County pi21 toa52 jeu21 (also called Dainaijiang ): in Jianghua County, Jiangyong County The Yao of Shaoyang Prefecture are found in the following locations (Shaoyang Prefecture Gazetteer 1997). Population statistics are from 1990. Xinning County (12,756 Yao persons): Malin , Huangjin , Jingwei (in Yuanshui ) Dongkou County (8,473 Yao persons): Naxi (), Changtang , Dawu ; Yuexi , Zhaping , Tongshan Longhui County (6,151 Yao persons): Huxingshan , Mao'ao , Xiaoshajiang , Qingshan , Matangshan Chengbu County (2,276 Yao persons): Lanrong , Qingyuan , Dayang , Tingping , Pengdong , Yangmei Suining County (1,641 Yao persons): Jinta , Shuikou The Shaoyang Prefecture Gazetteer (1997) reports that the Yao of Shaoyang Prefecture, Hunan speak the following languages. Mienic languages Longhui County : Huxingshan , Mao'ao , Xiaoshajiang Dongkou County : Dawu , Changtang Chengbu County : Qingyuan , Lanrong Hmongic languages? : Huangjin and Malin of Xinning County Southern Dong dialect: Naxi (), Dongkou County and Lianmin , Suining County The following population statistics of ethnic Yao in Hunan are from the 1990 Chinese census, as given in the Hunan Province Gazetteer (1997). County-level distribution of the Yao 2000 census (Only includes counties or county-equivalents containing >1% of county population.) After the Eleventh Plenary Session of the Eleventh Central Committee of the Communist Party of China (in session from 1977 to 1982), the Guangxi Nationality Institute and the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences together created a new Yao writing system which was unified with the research results of the Yao-American scholar Yus Hu (Traditional Chinese: /Simplified Chinese: ). The writing system was finalized at a one-day conference in 1984 in Ruyan County, Guangdong, which included Chinese professors Pan Chengqian (/), Deng Fanggui (/), Liu Baoyuan (/), Su Defu (/) and Yauz Mengh Borngh; Chinese government officials; Mien Americans Sengfo Chao (Zhao Fuming), Kao Chiem Chao (Zhao Youcai), and Chua Meng Chao; David T. Lee. American linguist Herbert C. Purnell developed a curriculum and workshop presentations on language learning in East and Southeast Asia, as well as Yao Seng Deng from Thailand. The US delegation took the new writing system to the Iu Mien community in the United States where it was adopted with a vote of 78 to 7 by a conference of Mien American community leaders. [7] This writing system based on the Latin alphabet was designed to be pan-dialectal; it distinguishes 30 syllable initials, 121 syllable finals and eight tones. For an example of how the unified alphabet is used to write Iu Mien, a common Yao language, see Iu Mien language. There is a separate written standard for Bunu, since it is from the Hmong/Miao side, rather than the Mien/Yao side, of the MiaoYao language family. Some people think that a variety of Yao is, or was, written in Nshu, an indigenous script in Southern part of Hunan Province in China. But this connection between Yao language and Nshu is disputed, because Nshu more likely recorded local Chinese dialect which might be also known by Yao people in Hunan. Officially illiteracy and semi-literacy among the Yao in China still stood at 40.6% in 2002. 