Zhu Qizhen (Chinese: ; 29 November 1427 23 February 1464) was the sixth and eighth emperor of the Ming dynasty. He ruled as the Zhengtong Emperor (Chinese: ; pinyin: Zhngtng) from 1435 to 1449, and as the Tianshun Emperor (Chinese: ; pinyin: Tinshn) from 1457 to 1464. His first era name means "right governance" and the second one means "obedience to Heaven". Zhu Qizhen was the son of the Xuande Emperor and his second wife, Empress Sun. At the beginning of the Zhengtong reign, the Ming dynasty was prosperous and at the height of its power as a result of the Xuande Emperor's able administration. The Zhengtong Emperor's accession at the age of eight made him the first child emperor of the dynasty hence the Zhengtong Emperor was easily influenced by others, especially the eunuch Wang Zhen. The emperor completely relied on Wang Zhen for advice and guidance. At the age of 22, in 1449, the Zhengtong Emperor was imprisoned by the Mongols when, advised by Wang Zhen, he personally directed and lost the Battle of Tumu Fortress against the Mongols under Esen Taishi (d.1455). His capture by the enemy force shook the Ming dynasty to its core and the ensuing crisis almost caused the dynasty to collapse had it not been for the capable governing of a prominent minister named Yu Qian. Although the Zhengtong Emperor was a prisoner of the Mongols, he became a good friend to both Tayisung Khan Toghtoa Bukha (14161453) and his grand preceptor (taishi) Esen. Meanwhile, to calm the crisis at home, his younger brother Zhu Qiyu was installed as the Jingtai Emperor. This reduced the Zhengtong Emperor's imperial status and he was granted the title of "grand emperor". The Zhengtong Emperor was released one year later in 1450 but when he returned to China, he was immediately put under house arrest by his brother for almost seven years. He resided in the southern palace of the Forbidden City and all outside contacts were severely curtailed by the Jingtai Emperor. His son, who later became the Chenghua Emperor, was stripped of the title of crown prince and replaced by the Jingtai Emperor's own son. This act greatly upset and devastated the former Zhengtong Emperor but the heir apparent died shortly thereafter. Overcome with grief, the Jingtai Emperor fell ill and the former Zhengtong Emperor decided to depose his brother by a palace coup. The former Zhengtong Emperor was successful in seizing the throne from the Jingtai Emperor, after which he changed his regnal name to "Tianshun" (lit. "obedience to Heaven") and went on to rule for another seven years. On 6 August 1461, the Tianshun Emperor issued an edict warning his subjects to be loyal to the throne and not to violate the laws. This was a veiled threat aimed at the general Cao Qin (d. 1461), who had become embroiled in a controversy when he had one of his retainers kill a man whom Ming authorities were attempting to interrogate (to find out about Cao's illegal foreign business transactions). On 7 August 1461, Cao Qin and his cohorts of Mongol descent attempted a coup against the Tianshun Emperor. However, during the first hours of the morning of 7 August, prominent Ming generals Wu Jin and Wu Cong, who were alerted of the coup, immediately relayed a warning to the emperor. Although alarmed, the Tianshun Emperor and his court made preparations for a conflict and barred the gates of the palace. During the ensuing onslaught in the capital later that morning, the Minister of Works and the Commander of the Imperial Guard were killed, while the rebels set the gates of the Forbidden City on fire. The eastern and western gates of the imperial city were only saved when pouring rains came and extinguished the fires. The fight lasted for nearly the entire day within the city; during which three of Cao Qin's brothers were killed, and Cao himself received wounds to both arms. With the failure of the coup, in order to escape being executed, Cao fled to his residence and committed suicide by jumping down a well within the walled compound of his home. The Tianshun Emperor died at the age of 37 in 1464 and was buried in the Yuling () mausoleum of the Ming Dynasty Tombs. Father Xuande Emperor Mother Empress Xiaogongzhang Empress Xiaozhuangrui (), family name Qian () (died 1468), married the Zhengtong Emperor in 1442, lost her position as empress when her husband was stripped of the position of emperor in 1449, reinstated as empress in 1457, created Empress Dowager Ciyi () during the reign of her stepson Empress Xiaosu (), family name Zhou () (died 1504), daughter of Zhou Neng (), held the rank of Noble Consort (), created Empress Dowager Sheng Ci Ren Shou () in 1487, created Grand Empress Dowager () during the reign of her grandson, never held the title of empress in life but was posthumously honored as an empress, mother of Princess Chongqing and the Chenghua Emperor Consort Jingzhuang'anmuchen (), family name Wan () Consort Duanjing'anhehui (), family name Wang () Consort Zhuangjing'anrongshu (), family name Gao () Consort Gongduanzhuanghuide (), family name Wei () Consort Gonghe'anjingshun (), family name Fan () (14141470), entered the imperial court in 1427, created a concubine of the Zhengtong Emperor in 1457 Consort Zhuangxiduansu'an (), family name Yang () Consort Zhaosujingduanxian (), family name Wang () Consort Zhenshunyigongjing (), family name Liu () Consort Anherongjingli (), family name Liu () Consort Duanzhuangzhao (), family name Wu () Consort Gong'anhe (), family name Gong () Consort Zhaojinggong (), family name Liu () Consort Zhaoshunli (), family name Zhang () Consort Zhaoyixian (), family name Li () Consort Gongjingzhuang (), family name Zhao () Consort Gongxicheng (), family name Zhang () Consort Gonghuihe (), family name Liang () Consort Xikechong (), family name Yu () Consort Huiheli (), family name Chen () Consort Rongjingzhen (), family name Wang () 